Today I'm speaking with Andrej Karpathy.
Andrej, why do you say that this will be
the decade of agents and not the year of agents?
First of all, thank you for having me here. I'm
excited to be here. The quote you've just
mentioned, "It's the decade of agents,"
is actually a reaction to a pre-existing quote.
I'm not actually sure who said this but they were
alluding to this being the year of agents with
respect to LLMs and how they were going to evolve.
I was triggered by that because there's some
over-prediction going on in the industry.
In my mind, this is more accurately
described as the decade of agents.
We have some very early agents that
are extremely impressive and that I
use daily—Claude and Codex and so on—but I
still feel there's so much work to be done.
My reaction is we'll be working
with these things for a decade.
They're going to get better,
and it's going to be wonderful.
I was just reacting to the
timelines of the implication.
What do you think will take a decade to
accomplish? What are the bottlenecks?
Actually making it work. When you're talking
about an agent, or what the labs have in mind
and maybe what I have in mind as well, you
should think of it almost like an employee or
an intern that you would hire to work with you.
For example, you work with some employees here.
When would you prefer to have an agent like
Claude or Codex do that work? Currently,
of course they can't. What would it
take for them to be able to do that?
Why don't you do it today?
The reason you don't do it
today is because they just don't work.
They don't have enough intelligence,
they're not multimodal enough, they
can't do computer use and all this stuff.
They don't do a lot of the things you've
alluded to earlier. They don't have
continual learning. You can't just tell
them something and they'll remember it.
They're cognitively lacking
and it's just not working.
It will take about a decade to
work through all of those issues.
Interesting. As a professional podcaster
and a viewer of AI from afar, it's easy
for me to identify what's lacking: continual
learning is lacking, or multimodality is lacking.
But I don't really have a good way
of trying to put a timeline on it.
If somebody asks how long continual learning
will take, I have no prior about whether
this is a project that should take 5
years, 10 years, or 50 years. Why a
decade? Why not one year? Why not 50 years?
This is where you get into a bit of my own
intuition, and doing a bit of an extrapolation
with respect to my own experience in the field.
I've been in AI for almost two decades.
It's going to be 15 years or so, not that long.
You had Richard Sutton here,
who was around for much longer.
I do have about 15 years of experience of people
making predictions, of seeing how they turned out.
Also I was in the industry for
a while, I was in research,
and I've worked in the industry for a while.
I have a general intuition
that I have left from that.
I feel like the problems are tractable, they're
surmountable, but they're still difficult.
If I just average it out, it
just feels like a decade to me.
This is quite interesting. I want
to hear not only the history,
but what people in the room felt was about to
happen at various different breakthrough moments.
What were the ways in which their feelings were
either overly pessimistic or overly optimistic?
Should we just go through each of them one by one?
That's a giant question because you're talking
about 15 years of stuff that happened.
AI is so wonderful because there have been
a number of seismic shifts where the entire
field has suddenly looked a different way.
I've maybe lived through two or three of those.
I still think there will continue to be
some because they come with
almost surprising regularity.
When my career began, when I started to work on
deep learning, when I became interested in deep
learning, this was by chance of being right next
to Geoff Hinton at the University of Toronto.
Geoff Hinton, of course, is
the godfather figure of AI.
He was training all these neural networks.
I thought it was incredible and interesting.
This was not the main thing that
everyone in AI was doing by far.
This was a niche little subject on the side.
That's maybe the first dramatic seismic shift
that came with the AlexNet and so on.
AlexNet reoriented everyone, and everyone
started to train neural networks, but it
was still very per-task, per specific task.
Maybe I have an image classifier or I have a
neural machine translator or something like that.
People became very slowly interested in agents.
People started to think, "Okay, maybe we have a
check mark next to the visual cortex or something
like that, but what about the other parts of the
brain, and how can we get a full agent or a
full entity that can interact in the world?"
The Atari deep reinforcement learning shift
in 2013 or so was part of that early effort
of agents, in my mind, because it was an
attempt to try to get agents that not just
perceive the world, but also take actions and
interact and get rewards from environments.
At the time, this was Atari games.
I feel that was a misstep.
It was a misstep that even the early OpenAI that
I was a part of adopted because at that time,
the zeitgeist was reinforcement learning
environments, games, game playing,
beat games, get lots of different types of
games, and OpenAI was doing a lot of that.
That was another prominent part of AI where maybe
for two or three or four years, everyone was doing
reinforcement learning on games.
That was all a bit of a misstep.
What I was trying to do at OpenAI is
I was always a bit suspicious of games
as being this thing that would lead to AGI.
Because in my mind, you want something like
an accountant or something that's
interacting with the real world.
I just didn't see how games add up to it.
My project at OpenAI, for example, was within the
scope of the Universe project, on an agent that
was using keyboard and mouse to operate web pages.
I really wanted to have something that
interacts with the actual digital world
that can do knowledge work.
It just so turns out that this
was extremely early, way too early, so early
that we shouldn't have been working on that.
Because if you're just stumbling your way around
and keyboard mashing and mouse clicking and trying
to get rewards in these environments, your
reward is too sparse and you just won't learn.
You're going to burn a forest
computing, and you're never
going to get something off the ground.
What you're missing is this power of
representation in the neural network.
For example, today people are training
those computer-using agents, but they're
doing it on top of a large language model.
You have to get the language model first,
you have to get the representations first,
and you have to do that by all the
pre-training and all the LLM stuff.
I feel maybe loosely speaking, people
kept trying to get the full thing too
early a few times, where people really try
to go after agents too early, I would say.
That was Atari and Universe
and even my own experience.
You actually have to do some things
first before you get to those agents.
Now the agents are a lot more competent, but maybe
we're still missing some parts of that stack.
I would say those are the three major
buckets of what people were doing:
training neural nets per-tasks,
trying the first round of agents,
and then maybe the LLMs and seeking the
representation power of the neural networks
before you tack on everything else on top.
Interesting. If I were to steelman the Sutton
perspective, it would be that humans
can just take on everything at once,
or even animals can take on everything at once.
Animals are maybe a better example because they
don't even have the scaffold of language.
They just get thrown out into the world,
and they just have to make sense
of everything without any labels.
The vision for AGI then should just be
something which looks at sensory data,
looks at the computer screen, and it just
figures out what's going on from scratch.
If a human were put in a similar situation and
had to be trained from scratch… This is like a
human growing up or an animal growing up.
Why shouldn't that be the vision for AI,
rather than this thing where we're
doing millions of years of training?
That's a really good question. Sutton was
on your podcast and I saw the podcast and I
had a write-up about that podcast that
gets into a bit of how I see things.
I'm very careful to make analogies to
animals because they came about by a
very different optimization process.
Animals are evolved, and they come
with a huge amount of hardware that's built in.
For example, my example in the post was the zebra.
A zebra gets born, and a few minutes later
it's running around and following its mother.
That's an extremely complicated thing to do.
That's not reinforcement learning. That's
something that's baked in. Evolution obviously
has some way of encoding the weights of our
neural nets in ATCGs, and I have no idea
how that works, but it apparently works.
Brains just came from a very different process,
and I'm very hesitant to take inspiration from it
because we're not actually running that process.
In my post, I said we're not building animals.
We're building ghosts or spirits or
whatever people want to call it, because
we're not doing training by evolution.
We're doing training by imitation of humans
and the data that they've put on the Internet.
You end up with these ethereal spirit entities
because they're fully digital
and they're mimicking humans.
It's a different kind of intelligence.
If you imagine a space of intelligences,
we're starting off at a different point almost.
We're not really building animals. But it's also
possible to make them a bit more animal-like
over time, and I think we should be doing that.
One more point. I do feel Sutton has a very...
His framework is, "We want to build animals."
I think that would be wonderful if we can
get that to work. That would be amazing.
If there were a single algorithm that you
can just run on the Internet and it learns
everything, that would be incredible.
I'm not sure that it exists and that's
certainly not what animals do, because
animals have this outer loop of evolution.
A lot of what looks like learning is
more like maturation of the brain.
I think there's very little
reinforcement learning for animals.
A lot of the reinforcement learning is more
like motor tasks; it's not intelligence tasks.
So I actually kind of think humans
don’t really use RL, roughly speaking.
Can you repeat the last sentence?
A lot of that intelligence is
not motor task…it's what, sorry?
A lot of the reinforcement learning, in my
perspective, would be things that are a lot more
motor-like, simple tasks like throwing a hoop.
But I don't think that humans use reinforcement
learning for a lot of intelligence tasks
like problem-solving and so on.
That doesn't mean we shouldn't
do that for research, but I just feel
like that's what animals do or don't.
I'm going to take a second to digest that
because there are a lot of different ideas.
Here’s one clarifying question I can
ask to understand the perspective.
You suggest that evolution is doing
the kind of thing that pre-training
does in the sense of building something
which can then understand the world.
The difference is that evolution
has to be titrated in the case
of humans through three gigabytes of DNA.
That's very unlike the weights of a model.
Literally, the weights of the model are
a brain, which obviously does not exist
in the sperm and the egg.
So it has to be grown.
Also, the information for every single
synapse in the brain simply cannot exist
in the three gigabytes that exist in the DNA.
Evolution seems closer to finding the algorithm
which then does the lifetime learning.
Now, maybe the lifetime learning is
not analogous to RL, to your point.
Is that compatible with the thing you
were saying, or would you disagree with that?
I think so. I would agree with you that there's
some miraculous compression
going on because obviously,
the weights of the neural net are not stored
in ATCGs. There's some dramatic compression.
There are some learning algorithms encoded that
take over and do some of the learning online.
I definitely agree with you on that.
I would say I'm a lot more practically minded.
I don't come at it from the
perspective of, let's build animals.
I come from it from the perspective
of, let's build useful things.
I have a hard hat on, and I'm just
observing that we're not going to do
evolution, because I don't know how to do that.
But it does turn out we can build these ghosts,
spirit-like entities, by imitating internet
documents. This works. It's a way to bring you
up to something that has a lot of built-in
knowledge and intelligence in some way,
similar to maybe what evolution has done.
That's why I call pre-training
this crappy evolution.
It's the practically possible version
with our technology and what we have available
to us to get to a starting point where we can do
things like reinforcement learning and so on.
Just to steelman the other perspective,
after doing this Sutton interview and thinking
about it a bit, he has an important point here.
Evolution does not give us the knowledge, really.
It gives us the algorithm to find the knowledge,
and that seems different from pre-training.
Perhaps the perspective is that pre-training helps
build the kind of entity which can learn better.
It teaches meta-learning, and therefore
it is similar to finding an algorithm.
But if it's "Evolution gives us knowledge,
pre-training gives us knowledge,"
that analogy seems to break down.
It's subtle and I think you're right to
push back on it, but basically the thing
that pre-training is doing, you're getting
the next-token predictor over the internet,
and you're training that into a neural net.
It's doing two things that are unrelated.
Number one, it's picking up all
this knowledge, as I call it.
Number two, it's actually becoming intelligent.
By observing the algorithmic patterns in the
internet, it boots up all these little circuits
and algorithms inside the neural net to do things
like in-context learning and all this stuff.
You don't need or want the knowledge.
I think that's probably holding back the neural
networks overall because it's getting them to rely
on the knowledge a little too much sometimes.
For example, I feel agents, one thing they're
not very good at, is going off the data
manifold of what exists on the internet.
If they had less knowledge or less
memory, maybe they would be better.
What I think we have to do going forward—and
this would be part of the research paradigms—is
figure out ways to remove some of the knowledge
and to keep what I call this cognitive core.
It's this intelligent entity that is stripped from
knowledge but contains the algorithms and contains
the magic of intelligence and problem-solving
and the strategies of it and all this stuff.
There's so much interesting stuff there. Let's
start with in-context learning. This is an
obvious point, but I think it's worth just
saying it explicitly and meditating on it.
The situation in which these models seem the most
intelligent—in which I talk to them and I'm like,
"Wow, there's really something on the other end
that's responding to me thinking about things—is
if it makes a mistake it's like, "Oh wait, that's
the wrong way to think about it. I'm backing up."
All that is happening in context.
That's where I feel like the real
intelligence is that you can visibly see.
That in-context learning process is
developed by gradient descent on pre-training.
It spontaneously meta-learns in-context learning,
but the in-context learning itself is not
gradient descent, in the same way that our
lifetime intelligence as humans to be able
to do things is conditioned by evolution
but our learning during our lifetime is
happening through some other process.
I don't fully agree with that, but
you should continue your thought.
Well, I'm very curious to understand
how that analogy breaks down.
I'm hesitant to say that in-context
learning is not doing gradient descent.
It's not doing explicit gradient descent.
In-context learning is pattern completion
within a token window.
It just turns out that there's
a huge amount of patterns on the internet.
You're right, the model learns to complete
the pattern, and that's inside the weights.
The weights of the neural network are trying
to discover patterns and complete the pattern.
There's some adaptation that happens inside
the neural network, which is magical
and just falls out from the internet
just because there's a lot of patterns.
I will say that there have been some papers
that I thought were interesting that look at
the mechanisms behind in-context learning.
I do think it's possible that in-context
learning runs a small gradient descent loop
internally in the layers of the neural network.
I recall one paper in particular where they were
doing linear regression using in-context learning.
Your inputs into the neural network are XY pairs,
XY, XY, XY that happen to be on the line.
Then you do X and you expect Y.
The neural network, when you train it
in this way, does linear regression.
Normally when you would run linear regression, you
have a small gradient descent optimizer that looks
at XY, looks at an error, calculates the gradient
of the weights and does the update a few times.
It just turns out that when they looked at the
weights of that in-context learning algorithm,
they found some analogies to
gradient descent mechanics.
In fact, I think the paper was even stronger
because they hardcoded the weights of a neural
network to do gradient descent through
attention and all the internals of the
neural network. That's just my only pushback.
Who knows how in-context learning works,
but I think that it's probably doing a bit of some
funky gradient descent internally. I think that
that's possible. I was only pushing back on your
saying that it's not doing in-context learning.
Who knows what it's doing, but it's probably maybe
doing something similar to it, but we don't know.
So then it's worth thinking okay, if
in-context learning and pre-training
are both implementing something like gradient
descent, why does it feel like with in-context
learning we're getting to this continual
learning, real intelligence-like thing?
Whereas you don't get the analogous feeling just
from pre-training. You could argue that. If it's
the same algorithm, what could be different?
One way you could think about it is,
how much information does the model store
per information it receives from training?
If you look at pre-training, if
you look at Llama 3 for example,
I think it's trained on 15 trillion tokens.
If you look at the 70B model, that would
be the equivalent of 0.07 bits per
token that it sees in pre-training,
in terms of the information in the weights
of the model compared to the tokens it reads.
Whereas if you look at the KV cache
and how it grows per additional token
in in-context learning, it's like 320 kilobytes.
So that's a 35 million-fold difference in how much
information per token is assimilated by the model.
I wonder if that's relevant at all.
I kind of agree. The way I usually put this is
that anything that happens during the training of
the neural network, the knowledge is only a hazy
recollection of what happened in training time.
That's because the compression is dramatic.
You're taking 15 trillion tokens and you're
compressing it to just your final neural
network of a few billion parameters.
Obviously it's a massive
amount of compression going on.
So I refer to it as a hazy
recollection of the internet documents.
Whereas anything that happens in the
context window of the neural network—you're
plugging in all the tokens and building up
all those KV cache representations—is very
directly accessible to the neural net.
So I compare the KV cache and the stuff
that happens at test time to
more like a working memory.
All the stuff that's in the context window is
very directly accessible to the neural net.
There's always these almost surprising
analogies between LLMs and humans.
I find them surprising because we're not
trying to build a human brain directly.
We're just finding that this
works and we're doing it.
But I do think that anything
that's in the weights, it's a
hazy recollection of what you read a year ago.
Anything that you give it as a context at test
time is directly in the working memory.
That's a very powerful analogy to
think through things.
When you, for example,
go to an LLM and you ask it about some book
and what happened in it, like Nick Lane's
book or something like that, the LLM will often
give you some stuff which is roughly correct.
But if you give it the full chapter and ask it
questions, you're going to get much better results
because it's now loaded in the
working memory of the model.
So a very long way of saying
I agree and that's why.
Stepping back, what is the part
about human intelligence that we
have most failed to replicate with these models?
Just a lot of it. So maybe one way to think
about it, I don't know if this is the best way,
but I almost feel like — again, making these
analogies imperfect as they are — we've stumbled
by with the transformer neural network,
which is extremely powerful, very general.
You can train transformers on audio, or
video, or text, or whatever you want,
and it just learns patterns and they're
very powerful, and it works really well.
That to me almost indicates that this
is some piece of cortical tissue.
It's something like that, because the
cortex is famously very plastic as well.
You can rewire parts of brains.
There were the slightly gruesome experiments
with rewiring the visual cortex to the auditory
cortex, and this animal learned fine, et cetera.
So I think that this is cortical tissue.
I think when we're doing reasoning and
planning inside the neural networks, doing
reasoning traces for thinking models,
that's kind of like the prefrontal cortex.
Maybe those are like little checkmarks,
but I still think there are many brain
parts and nuclei that are not explored.
For example, there's a basal ganglia doing a
bit of reinforcement learning when we fine-tune
the models on reinforcement learning. But where's
the hippocampus? Not obvious what that would be.
Some parts are probably not important.
Maybe the cerebellum is not important
to cognition, its thoughts, so
maybe we can skip some of it.
But I still think there's, for example, the
amygdala, all the emotions and instincts.
There's probably a bunch of other nuclei
in the brain that are very ancient that
I don't think we've really replicated.
I don't know that we should be pursuing the
building of an analog of a human brain.
I'm an engineer mostly at heart.
Maybe another way to answer the question is that
you're not going to hire this thing as an intern.
It's missing a lot of it because it comes with
a lot of these cognitive deficits that we all
intuitively feel when we talk to the models.
So it's not fully there yet.
You can look at it as not all the
brain parts are checked off yet.
This is maybe relevant to the question of thinking
about how fast these issues will be solved.
Sometimes people will say
about continual learning,
"Look, you could easily replicate this capability.
Just as in-context learning emerged spontaneously
as a result of pre-training, continual
learning over longer horizons will emerge
spontaneously if the model is incentivized to
recollect information over longer horizons,
or horizons longer than one session."
So if there's some outer loop RL which has
many sessions within that outer loop, then this
continual learning where it fine-tunes itself,
or it writes to an external memory or
something, will just emerge spontaneously.
Do you think things like that are plausible?
I just don't have a prior over
how plausible that is.
How likely is that to happen?
I don't know that I fully resonate with that.
These models, when you boot them up and they have
zero tokens in the window, they're always
restarting from scratch where they were.
So I don't know in that
worldview what it looks like.
Maybe making some analogies to humans—just because
I think it's roughly concrete and interesting to
think through—I feel like when I'm awake, I'm
building up a context window of stuff that's
happening during the day.
But when I go to sleep,
something magical happens where I don't
think that context window stays around.
There's some process of distillation
into the weights of my brain.
This happens during sleep and all this stuff.
We don't have an equivalent
of that in large language models.
That's to me more adjacent to when you talk
about continual learning and so on as absent.
These models don't really have a distillation
phase of taking what happened, analyzing it
obsessively, thinking through it, doing some
synthetic data generation process and distilling
it back into the weights, and maybe having
a specific neural net per person. Maybe it's
a LoRA. It's not a full-weight neural network.
It's just some small sparse subset
of the weights that are changed.
But we do want to create ways of creating
these individuals that have very long context.
It's not only remaining in the context window
because the context windows grow very, very long.
Maybe we have some very elaborate,
sparse attention over it.
But I still think that humans obviously have some
process for distilling some of that knowledge
into the weights. We're missing it. I do also
think that humans have some very elaborate,
sparse attention scheme, which I think
we're starting to see some early hints of.
DeepSeek v3.2 just came out and I saw that they
have sparse attention as an example, and this is
one way to have very, very long context windows.
So I feel like we are redoing a lot of the
cognitive tricks that evolution came up
with through a very different process.
But we're going to converge on a
similar architecture cognitively.
In 10 years, do you think it'll still be something
like a transformer, but with much more modified
attention and more sparse MLPs and so forth?
The way I like to think about it is
translation invariance in time.
So 10 years ago, where were we? 2015.
In 2015, we had convolutional neural networks
primarily, residual networks just came out.
So remarkably similar, I guess, but quite a
bit different still. The transformer was not
around. All these more modern tweaks
on the transformer were not around.
Maybe some of the things that we can bet on, I
think in 10 years by translational equivariance,
is that we're still training giant neural
networks with a forward backward pass and
update through gradient descent,
but maybe it looks a bit different,
and it's just that everything is much bigger.
Recently I went back all the way to 1989 which
was a fun exercise for me, a few years ago,
because I was reproducing Yann LeCun's 1989
convolutional network, which was the first neural
network I'm aware of trained via gradient descent,
like modern neural network trained
gradient descent on digit recognition.
I was just interested in
how I could modernize this.
How much of this is algorithms?
How much of this is data?
How much of this progress is compute and systems?
I was able to very quickly halve the learning
just by time traveling by 33 years.
So if I time travel by algorithms 33 years,
I could adjust what Yann LeCun did
in 1989, and I could halve the error.
But to get further gains, I
had to add a lot more data,
I had to 10x the training set, and then I
had to add more computational optimizations.
I had to train for much longer with dropout
and other regularization techniques.
So all these things have
to improve simultaneously.
We're probably going to have a lot more
data, we're probably going to have a lot
better hardware, probably going to have a lot
better kernels and software, we're probably
going to have better algorithms.
All of those, it's almost like
no one of them is winning too much.
All of them are surprisingly equal.
This has been the trend for a while.
So to answer your question, I expect differences
algorithmically to what's happening today.
But I do also expect that some of the
things that have stuck around for a very
long time will probably still be there.
It's probably still a giant neural network trained
with gradient descent. That would be my guess.
It's surprising that all of those things
together only halved the error, 30 years
of progress…. Maybe half is a lot. Because if
you halve the error, that actually means that…
Half is a lot. But I guess what was shocking to me
is everything needs to improve across the board:
architecture, optimizer, loss function.
It also has improved across the board forever.
So I expect all those
changes to be alive and well.
Yeah. I was about to ask you a very
similar question about nanochat.
Since you just coded it up recently,
every single step in the process of
building a chatbot is fresh in your RAM.
I'm curious if you had similar thoughts about,
"Oh, there was no one thing that was
relevant to going from GPT-2 to nanochat."
What are some surprising
takeaways from the experience?
Of building nanochat? So nanochat
is a repository I released.
Was it yesterday or the day
before? I can't remember.
We can see the sleep
deprivation that went into the…
It's trying to be the simplest complete
repository that covers the whole pipeline
end-to-end of building a ChatGPT clone.
So you have all of the steps, not just
any individual step, which is a bunch.
I worked on all the individual steps
in the past and released small pieces
of code that show you how that's done
in an algorithmic sense, in simple code.
But this handles the entire pipeline.
In terms of learning, I don't
know that I necessarily found
something that I learned from it.
I already had in my mind how you build it.
This is just the process of mechanically building
it and making it clean enough so that people can
learn from it and that they find it useful.
What is the best way for somebody
to learn from it?
Is it to just delete
all the code and try to reimplement from
scratch, try to add modifications to it?
That's a great question. Basically
it's about 8,000 lines of code
that takes you through the entire pipeline.
I would probably put it on the right monitor.
If you have two monitors, you put it on the right.
You want to build it from scratch,
you build it from the start.
You're not allowed to copy-paste, you're allowed
to reference, you're not allowed to copy-paste.
Maybe that's how I would do it.
But I also think the repository
by itself is a pretty large beast.
When you write this code, you don't go from top
to bottom, you go from chunks and you grow the
chunks, and that information is absent.
You wouldn't know where to start.
So it's not just a final repository that's
needed, it's the building of the repository,
which is a complicated chunk-growing process.
So that part is not there yet.
I would love to add that probably later this week.
It's probably a video or something like that.
Roughly speaking, that's what I would try to do.
Build the stuff yourself, but don't allow
yourself copy-paste.
I do think that
there's two types of knowledge, almost.
There's the high-level surface knowledge, but when
you build something from scratch, you're forced to
come to terms with what you don't understand and
you don't know that you don't understand it.
It always leads to a deeper understanding.
It's the only way to build.
If I can't build it, I don't understand it.
That’s a Feynman quote, I believe.
I 100% have always believed this very
strongly, because there are all these micro
things that are just not properly arranged
and you don't really have the knowledge.
You just think you have the knowledge.
So don't write blog posts, don't
do slides, don't do any of that.
Build the code, arrange it, get it to work.
It's the only way to go. Otherwise,
you're missing knowledge.
You tweeted out that coding models
were of very little help to you in assembling
this repository. I'm curious why that was.
I guess I built the repository over
a period of a bit more than a month.
I would say there are three major classes
of how people interact with code right now.
Some people completely reject all of LLMs
and they are just writing by scratch.
This is probably not the
right thing to do anymore.
The intermediate part, which is where I am, is
you still write a lot of things from scratch,
but you use the autocomplete that's
available now from these models.
So when you start writing out a little
piece of it, it will autocomplete for
you and you can just tap through.
Most of the time it's correct,
sometimes it's not, and you edit it.
But you're still very much the
architect of what you're writing.
Then there's the vibe coding: "Hi,
please implement this or that," enter, and then
let the model do it. That's the agents. I do feel
like the agents work in very specific settings,
and I would use them in specific settings.
But these are all tools available to you
and you have to learn what they're good at,
what they're not good at, and when to use them.
So the agents are pretty good, for example,
if you're doing boilerplate stuff.
Boilerplate code that's just
copy-paste stuff, they're very good at that.
They're very good at stuff that occurs very often
on the Internet because there are lots of examples
of it in the training sets of these models.
There are features of things where
the models will do very well.
I would say nanochat is not an example of
those because it's a fairly unique repository.
There's not that much code in the way that
I've structured it. It's not boilerplate code.
It's intellectually intense code almost, and
everything has to be very precisely arranged.
The models have so many cognitive deficits.
One example, they kept misunderstanding the code
because they have too much memory from
all the typical ways of doing things on
the Internet that I just wasn't adopting.
The models, for example—I don't know if I
want to get into the full details—but they kept
thinking I'm writing normal code, and I'm not.
Maybe one example?
You have eight GPUs
that are all doing forward, backwards.
The way to synchronize gradients between
them is to use a Distributed Data Parallel
container of PyTorch, which automatically
as you're doing the backward, it will start
communicating and synchronizing gradients.
I didn't use DDP because I didn't want
to use it, because it's not necessary.
I threw it out and wrote my own synchronization
routine that's inside the step of the optimizer.
The models were trying to get me to
use the DDP container. They were very
concerned. This gets way too technical,
but I wasn't using that container because
I don't need it and I have a custom
implementation of something like it.
They just couldn't internalize
that you had your own.
They couldn't get past that. They kept trying to
mess up the style. They're way too over-defensive.
They make all these try-catch statements.
They keep trying to make a production code base,
and I have a bunch of assumptions
in my code, and it's okay.
I don't need all this extra stuff in there.
So I feel like they're bloating the code base,
bloating the complexity, they keep
misunderstanding, they're using
deprecated APIs a bunch of times. It's a total
mess. It's just not net useful. I can go in,
I can clean it up, but it's not net useful.
I also feel like it's annoying to have to
type out what I want in English
because it's too much typing.
If I just navigate to the part of the code that I
want, and I go where I know the code has to appear
and I start typing out the first few letters,
autocomplete gets it and just gives you the code.
This is a very high information
bandwidth to specify what you want.
You point to the code where you want
it, you type out the first few pieces,
and the model will complete it.
So what I mean is, these models
are good in certain parts of the stack.
There are two examples where I use the
models that I think are illustrative.
One was when I generated the report.
That's more boilerplate-y, so I
partially vibe-coded some of that stuff.
That was fine because it's not
mission-critical stuff, and it works fine.
The other part is when I was
rewriting the tokenizer in Rust.
I'm not as good at Rust
because I'm fairly new to Rust.
So there's a bit of vibe coding going on
when I was writing some of the Rust code.
But I had a Python implementation that I
fully understand, and I'm just making sure
I'm making a more efficient version of it, and
I have tests so I feel safer doing that stuff.
They increase accessibility to languages or
paradigms that you might not be as familiar with.
I think they're very helpful there as well.
There's a ton of Rust code out there,
the models are pretty good at it.
I happen to not know that much about it,
so the models are very useful there.
The reason this question is so interesting
is because the main story people
have about AI exploding and getting
to superintelligence pretty rapidly is AI
automating AI engineering and AI research.
They'll look at the fact that you can have
Claude Code and make entire applications,
CRUD applications, from scratch and think, "If
you had this same capability inside of OpenAI
and DeepMind and everything, just imagine
a thousand of you or a million of you in
parallel, finding little architectural tweaks."
It's quite interesting to hear you say that this
is the thing they're asymmetrically worse at.
It's quite relevant to forecasting whether
the AI 2027-type explosion is
likely to happen anytime soon.
That's a good way of putting it, and you're
getting at why my timelines are a bit longer.
You're right. They're not very good at code
that has never been written before, maybe it's
one way to put it, which is what we're trying
to achieve when we're building these models.
Very naive question, but the architectural
tweaks that you're adding to nanochat,
they're in a paper somewhere, right?
They might even be in a repo somewhere.
Is it surprising that they aren't able to
integrate that into whenever you're like,
"Add RoPE embeddings" or something,
they do that in the wrong way?
It's tough. They know, but they don't fully know.
They don't know how to fully integrate it into
the repo and your style and your code and
your place, and some of the custom things
that you're doing and how it fits with
all the assumptions of the repository.
They do have some knowledge, but they
haven't gotten to the place where they
can integrate it and make sense of it.
A lot of the stuff continues to improve.
Currently, the state-of-the-art
model that I go to is the GPT-5 Pro,
and that's a very powerful model.
If I have 20 minutes,
I will copy-paste my entire repo and I go to
GPT-5 Pro, the oracle, for some questions.
Often it's not too bad and surprisingly
good compared to what existed a year ago.
Overall, the models are not there.
I feel like the industry is making too
big of a jump and is trying to pretend like this
is amazing, and it's not. It's slop. They're not
coming to terms with it, and maybe they're
trying to fundraise or something like that.
I'm not sure what's going on, but we're
at this intermediate stage. The models are
amazing. They still need a lot of work.
For now, autocomplete is my sweet spot.
But sometimes, for some types of
code, I will go to an LLM agent.
Here's another reason this is really interesting.
Through the history of programming, there have
been many productivity improvements—compilers,
linting, better programming languages—which
have increased programmer productivity
but have not led to an explosion.
That sounds very much like the
autocomplete tab, and this other
category is just automation of the programmer.
It's interesting you're seeing more in the
category of the historical analogies
of better compilers or something.
Maybe this gets to one other thought.
I have a hard time differentiating where
AI begins and stops because I see
AI as fundamentally an extension of
computing in a pretty fundamental way.
I see a continuum of this recursive
self-improvement or speeding up programmers
all the way from the beginning: code editors,
syntax highlighting, or checking even of
the types, like data type checking—all
these tools that we've built for
each other. Even search engines.
Why aren't search engines part of AI? Ranking
is AI. At some point, Google, even early on,
was thinking of themselves as an AI company doing
Google Search engine, which is totally fair.
I see it as a lot more of a continuum than other
people do, and it's hard for me to draw the line.
I feel like we're now getting a much
better autocomplete, and now we're also
getting some agents which are these loopy
things, but they go off-rails sometimes.
What's going on is that the human is progressively
doing a bit less and less of the low-level stuff.
We're not writing the assembly
code because we have compilers.
Compilers will take my high-level
language in C and write the assembly code.
We're abstracting ourselves very, very slowly.
There's this what I call "autonomy slider," where
more and more stuff is automated—of the stuff that
can be automated at any point in time—and we're
doing a bit less and less and raising ourselves
in the layer of abstraction over the automation.
Let's talk about RL a bit.
You tweeted some very
interesting things about this.
Conceptually, how should we think about
the way that humans are able to build a rich world
model just from interacting with our environment,
and in ways that seem almost irrespective of
the final reward at the end of the episode?
If somebody is starting a business, and at
the end of 10 years, she finds out whether
the business succeeded or failed, we say that
she's earned a bunch of wisdom and experience.
But it's not because the log probs of every
single thing that happened over the last 10
years are up-weighted or down-weighted.
Something much more deliberate and
rich is happening.
What is the ML analogy, and how does that
compare to what we're doing with LLMs right now?
Maybe the way I would put it is that humans don't
use reinforcement learning, as I said.
I think they do something different.
Reinforcement learning is a lot worse than I
think the average person thinks. Reinforcement
learning is terrible. It just so happens
that everything that we had before it is
much worse because previously we were just
imitating people, so it has all these issues.
In reinforcement learning, say you're solving
a math problem, because it's very simple.
You're given a math problem and
you're trying to find the solution.
In reinforcement learning, you will
try lots of things in parallel first.
You're given a problem, you try hundreds of
different attempts. These attempts can be complex.
They can be like, "Oh, let me try this, let me try
that, this didn't work, that didn't work," etc.
Then maybe you get an answer.
Now you check the back of the book and you see,
"Okay, the correct answer is this."
You can see that this one, this one,
and that one got the correct answer,
but these other 97 of them didn't.
Literally what reinforcement learning does is it
goes to the ones that worked really well and every
single thing you did along the way, every single
token gets upweighted like, "Do more of this."
The problem with that is people will say
that your estimator has high variance,
but it's just noisy. It's noisy. It almost assumes
that every single little piece of the solution
that you made that arrived at the right answer
was the correct thing to do, which is not true.
You may have gone down the wrong alleys
until you arrived at the right solution.
Every single one of those incorrect things you
did, as long as you got to the correct solution,
will be upweighted as, "Do more of this."
It's terrible. It's noise. You've done all
this work only to find, at the end, you get a
single number of like, "Oh, you did correct."
Based on that, you weigh that entire
trajectory as like, upweight or downweight.
The way I like to put it is you're
sucking supervision through a straw.
You've done all this work that
could be a minute of rollout,
and you're sucking the bits of supervision of the
final reward signal through a straw and you're
broadcasting that across the entire trajectory
and using that to upweight or downweight that
trajectory. It's just stupid and
crazy. A human would never do this.
Number one, a human would
never do hundreds of rollouts.
Number two, when a person finds a solution,
they will have a pretty complicated process
of review of, "Okay, I think these parts I
did well, these parts I did not do that well.
I should probably do this or that."
They think through things. There's
nothing in current LLMs that does this.
There's no equivalent of it. But I do see
papers popping out that are trying to do this
because it's obvious to everyone in the field.
The first imitation learning, by the way, was
extremely surprising and miraculous and amazing,
that we can fine-tune by imitation on humans.
That was incredible. Because in the beginning,
all we had was base models. Base models
are autocomplete. It wasn't obvious to
me at the time, and I had to learn this.
The paper that blew my mind was InstructGPT,
because it pointed out that you can take
the pretrained model, which is autocomplete,
and if you just fine-tune it on text that looks
like conversations, the model will very rapidly
adapt to become very conversational, and it
keeps all the knowledge from pre-training.
This blew my mind because I didn't understand
that stylistically, it can adjust so quickly
and become an assistant to a user through just
a few loops of fine-tuning on that kind of data.
It was very miraculous to me that that worked.
So incredible. That was two to three years of
work. Now came RL. And RL allows you to do a bit
better than just imitation learning because you
can have these reward functions and you
can hill-climb on the reward functions.
Some problems have just correct answers, you
can hill-climb on that without getting expert
trajectories to imitate. So that's amazing. The
model can also discover solutions that a human
might never come up with. This is incredible.
Yet, it's still stupid. We need more. I saw a
paper from Google yesterday that tried to
have this reflect & review idea in mind.
Was it the memory bank paper or something? I don't
know. I've seen a few papers along these lines.
So I expect there to be some major update to how
we do algorithms for LLMs coming in that realm.
I think we need three or four or
five more, something like that.
You're so good at coming up with evocative
phrases. "Sucking supervision through a
straw." It's so good. You're saying the problem
with outcome-based reward is that you have this
huge trajectory, and then at the end, you're
trying to learn every single possible thing
about what you should do and what you should
learn about the world from that one final bit.
Given the fact that this is obvious, why hasn't
process-based supervision as an alternative been
a successful way to make models more capable?
What has been preventing us from using
this alternative paradigm?
Process-based supervision just
refers to the fact that we're not going to
have a reward function only at the very end.
After you've done 10 minutes of work, I'm not
going to tell you you did well or not well.
I'm going to tell you at every single
step of the way how well you're doing.
The reason we don't have that is
it's tricky how you do that properly.
You have partial solutions and you
don't know how to assign credit.
So when you get the right answer, it's just
an equality match to the answer. It’s very
simple to implement. If you're doing process
supervision, how do you assign in an automatable
way, a partial credit assignment?
It's not obvious how you do it.
Lots of labs are trying to
do it with these LLM judges.
You get LLMs to try to do it.
You prompt an LLM, "Hey,
look at a partial solution of a student.
How well do you think they're doing if the
answer is this?" and they try to tune the prompt.
The reason that this is tricky is quite subtle.
It's the fact that anytime you use an LLM to
assign a reward, those LLMs are giant things
with billions of parameters, and they're gameable.
If you're reinforcement learning with respect to
them, you will find adversarial examples
for your LLM judges, almost guaranteed.
So you can't do this for too long.
You do maybe 10 steps or 20 steps, and maybe
it will work, but you can't do 100 or 1,000.
I understand it's not obvious, but basically
the model will find little cracks.
It will find all these spurious
things in the nooks and crannies of the
giant model and find a way to cheat it.
One example that's prominently in my mind, this
was probably public, if you're using an LLM judge
for a reward, you just give it a solution from a
student and ask it if the student did well or not.
We were training with
reinforcement learning against
that reward function, and it worked really well.
Then, suddenly, the reward became extremely large.
It was a massive jump, and it did perfect.
You're looking at it like, "Wow, this means
the student is perfect in all these problems.
It's fully solved math." But when you look at
the completions that you're getting from
the model, they are complete nonsense.
They start out okay, and then
they change to "dhdhdhdh."
It's just like, "Oh, okay, let's take two plus
three and we do this and this, and then dhdhdhdh."
You're looking at it, and
it's like, this is crazy.
How is it getting a reward of one or 100%?
You look at the LLM judge, and it turns out
that "dhdhdhdh" is an adversarial example for
the model, and it assigns 100% probability to it.
It's just because this is an
out-of-sample example to the LLM.
It's never seen it during training,
and you're in pure generalization land.
It's never seen it during training, and in
the pure generalization land, you can find
these examples that break it.
You're basically training
the LLM to be a prompt injection model.
Not even that. Prompt injection is way too fancy.
You're finding adversarial
examples, as they're called.
These are nonsensical solutions that are obviously
wrong, but the model thinks they are amazing.
To the extent you think this is the
bottleneck to making RL more functional,
then that will require making LLMs better judges,
if you want to do this in an automated way.
Is it just going to be some sort
of GAN-like approach where you
have to train models to be more robust?
The labs are probably doing all that.
The obvious thing is, "dhdhdhdh"
should not get 100% reward.
Okay, well, take "dhdhdhdh," put it
in the training set of the LLM judge,
and say this is not 100%, this is 0%.
You can do this, but every time you do
this, you get a new LLM, and it
still has adversarial examples.
There's an infinity of adversarial examples.
Probably if you iterate this a few times, it'll
probably be harder and harder to find adversarial
examples, but I'm not 100% sure because this thing
has a trillion parameters or whatnot.
I bet you the labs are trying.
I still think we need other ideas.
Interesting. Do you have some shape
of what the other idea could be?
This idea of a review solution
encompassing synthetic examples such that
when you train on them, you get better,
and meta-learn it in some way.
I think there are some papers
that I'm starting to see pop out.
I am only at a stage of reading abstracts
because a lot of these papers are just ideas.
Someone has to make it work on a frontier
LLM lab scale in full generality
because when you see these papers,
they pop up, and it's just a bit noisy.
They're cool ideas, but I haven't seen
anyone convincingly show that this is possible.
That said, the LLM labs are fairly closed,
so who knows what they're doing now.
I can conceptualize how you would be able
to train on synthetic examples or synthetic
problems that you have made for yourself.
But there seems to be another thing humans
do—maybe sleep is this, maybe daydreaming is
this—which is not necessarily to come up
with fake problems, but just to reflect.
I'm not sure what the ML analogy is for
daydreaming or sleeping, or just reflecting.
I haven't come up with a new problem.
Obviously, the very basic analogy would just
be fine-tuning on reflection bits, but I feel like
in practice that probably wouldn't work that well.
Do you have some take on what
the analogy of this thing is?
I do think that we're missing some aspects there.
As an example, let’s take reading a book.
Currently when LLMs are reading a book, what that
means is we stretch out the sequence of text,
and the model is predicting the next token,
and it's getting some knowledge from that.
That's not really what humans do.
When you're reading a book,
I don't even feel like the book is exposition
I'm supposed to be attending to and training on.
The book is a set of prompts for
me to do synthetic data generation,
or for you to get to a book club
and talk about it with your friends.
It's by manipulating that information
that you actually gain that knowledge.
We have no equivalent of that with LLMs. They
don't really do that. I'd love to see during
pre-training some stage that thinks through
the material and tries to reconcile it with
what it already knows, and thinks through it
for some amount of time and gets that to work.
There's no equivalence of any of this.
This is all research. There are some
subtle—very subtle that I think are very hard
to understand—reasons why it's not trivial.
If I can just describe one: why can't we
just synthetically generate and train on it?
Because every synthetic example, if
I just give synthetic generation of
the model thinking about a book, you look
at it and you're like, "This looks great.
Why can't I train on it?"
You could try, but the model
will get much worse if you continue trying.
That's because all of the samples you get
from models are silently collapsed.
Silently—it is not obvious if you look
at any individual example of it—they occupy
a very tiny manifold of the possible space of
thoughts about content.
The LLMs, when they come off,
they're what we call "collapsed."
They have a collapsed data distribution.
One easy way to see it is to go to
ChatGPT and ask it, "Tell me a joke."
It only has like three jokes.
It's not giving you the whole breadth
of possible jokes. It knows like three jokes.
They're silently collapsed. You're not getting
the richness and the diversity and the entropy
from these models as you would get from humans.
Humans are a lot noisier, but
at least they're not biased,
in a statistical sense. They're not silently
collapsed. They maintain a huge amount of entropy.
So how do you get synthetic data generation to
work despite the collapse and while maintaining
the entropy? That’s a research problem.
Just to make sure I understood, the reason
that the collapse is relevant to synthetic data
generation is because you want to be able to
come up with synthetic problems or reflections
which are not already in your data distribution?
I guess what I'm saying is, say we have a chapter
of a book and I ask an LLM to think about it,
it will give you something
that looks very reasonable.
But if I ask it 10 times, you'll
notice that all of them are the same.
You can't just keep scaling "reflection"
on the same amount of prompt information
and then get returns from that.
Any individual sample will look okay,
but the distribution of it is quite terrible.
It's quite terrible in such a way that if
you continue training on too much of
your own stuff, you actually collapse.
I think that there's possibly
no fundamental solution to this.
I also think humans collapse over time.
These analogies are surprisingly good.
Humans collapse during the course of their lives.
This is why children, they haven't overfit yet.
They will say stuff that will shock you
because you can see where they're coming from,
but it's just not the thing people say,
because they're not yet collapsed. But we're
collapsed. We end up revisiting the same thoughts.
We end up saying more and more of the same stuff,
and the learning rates go down, and
the collapse continues to get worse,
and then everything deteriorates.
Have you seen this super interesting
paper that dreaming is a way of preventing
this kind of overfitting and collapse?
The reason dreaming is evolutionary adaptive
is to put you in weird situations that are
very unlike your day-to-day reality, so
as to prevent this kind of overfitting.
It's an interesting idea. I do think
that when you're generating things
in your head and then you're attending to
it, you're training on your own samples,
you're training on your synthetic data.
If you do it for too long,
you go off-rails and you collapse way too much.
You always have to seek entropy in your life.
Talking to other people is a great
source of entropy, and things like that.
So maybe the brain has also built some internal
mechanisms for increasing the amount of entropy
in that process. That's an interesting idea.
This is a very ill-formed thought so I’ll
just put it out and let you react to it.
The best learners that we are aware of,
which are children, are extremely
bad at recollecting information.
In fact, at the very earliest stages of
childhood, you will forget everything.
You're just an amnesiac about everything
that happens before a certain year date.
But you're extremely good at picking up
new languages and learning from the world.
Maybe there's some element of being
able to see the forest for the trees.
Whereas if you compare it to the opposite end
of the spectrum, you have LLM pre-training,
where these models will literally be
able to regurgitate word-for-word what
is the next thing in a Wikipedia page.
But their ability to learn abstract
concepts really quickly, the way
a child can, is much more limited.
Then adults are somewhere in between, where
they don't have the flexibility of childhood
learning, but they can memorize facts and
information in a way that is harder for kids.
I don't know if there's something
interesting about that spectrum.
I think there's something very
interesting about that, 100%.
I do think that humans have a lot more of
an element, compared to LLMs, of seeing
the forest for the trees.
We're not actually that good
at memorization, which is actually a feature.
Because we're not that good at memorization, we're
forced to find patterns in a more general sense.
LLMs in comparison are extremely good
at memorization.
They will recite
passages from all these training sources.
You can give them completely nonsensical data.
You can hash some amount of text or something
like that, you get a completely random sequence.
If you train on it, even just for a single
iteration or two, it can suddenly regurgitate
the entire thing. It will memorize it.
There's no way a person can read a single
sequence of random numbers and recite it to you.
That's a feature, not a bug, because it forces
you to only learn the generalizable components.
Whereas LLMs are distracted by all the memory
that they have of the pre-training
documents, and it's probably very
distracting to them in a certain sense.
So that's why when I talk about the
cognitive core, I want to remove the
memory, which is what we talked about.
I'd love to have them have less memory
so that they have to look things up,
and they only maintain the algorithms for
thought, and the idea of an experiment,
and all this cognitive glue of acting.
And this is also relevant to preventing
model collapse?
Let me think. I'm
not sure. It's almost like a separate axis.
The models are way too good at memorization,
and somehow we should remove that.
People are much worse, but it's a good thing.
What is a solution to model collapse?
There are very naive things you could attempt.
The distribution over logits
should be wider or something.
There are many naive things you could try.
What ends up being the problem
with the naive approaches?
That's a great question. You can imagine having
a regularization for entropy and things like that.
I guess they just don't work as well empirically
because right now the models are collapsed.
But I will say most of the tasks that we
want from them don't actually demand diversity.
That’s probably the answer to what's going on.
The frontier labs are trying
to make the models useful.
I feel like the diversity of
the outputs is not so much...
Number one, it's much harder to work with and
evaluate and all this stuff, but maybe it's not
what's capturing most of the value.
In fact, it's actively penalized.
If you're super creative in RL, it's not good.
Yeah. Or maybe if you're doing a lot of writing,
help from LLMs and stuff like that, it's probably
bad because the models will silently give
you all the same stuff.
They won't explore lots
of different ways of answering a question.
Maybe this diversity, not as many applications
need it so the models don't have it.
But then it's a problem at
synthetic data generation time, et cetera.
So we're shooting ourselves in the foot by not
allowing this entropy to maintain in the model.
Possibly the labs should try harder.
I think you hinted that it's a very
fundamental problem, it won't be easy
to solve. What's your intuition for that?
I don't know if it's super fundamental.
I don't know if I intended to say that.
I do think that I haven't done these experiments,
but I do think that you could probably
regularize the entropy to be higher.
So you're encouraging the model to give you more
and more solutions, but you don't want it to
start deviating too much from the training data.
It's going to start making up its own language.
It's going to start using words that are
extremely rare, so it's going to drift too
much from the distribution.
So I think controlling
the distribution is just tricky.
It's probably not trivial in that sense.
How many bits should the optimal core
of intelligence end up being if you
just had to make a guess?
The thing we put on the
von Neumann probes, how big does it have to be?
It's really interesting in the history of the
field because at one point everything was
very scaling-pilled in terms of like, "Oh,
we're gonna make much bigger models,
trillions of parameter models."
What the models have done in size
is they've gone up and now they've
come down. State-of-the-art models are smaller.
Even then, I think they memorized way too much.
So I had a prediction a while back that I almost
feel like we can get cognitive cores that are
very good at even a billion parameters.
If you talk to a billion parameter model,
I think in 20 years, you can have
a very productive conversation.
It thinks and it's a lot more like a human.
But if you ask it some factual question, it might
have to look it up, but it knows that it doesn't
know and it might have to look it up and it will
just do all the reasonable things.
That's surprising that you think
it'll take a billion parameters.
Because already we have billion
parameter models or a couple billion
parameter models that are very intelligent.
Well, state-of-the-art models
are like a trillion parameters.
But they remember so much stuff.
Yeah, but I'm surprised that in 10 years,
given the pace… We have gpt-oss-20b.
That's way better than GPT-4 original,
which was a trillion plus parameters.
Given that trend, I'm surprised you
think in 10 years the cognitive
core is still a billion parameters.
I'm surprised you're not like, "Oh it's
gonna be like tens of millions or millions."
Here's the issue, the training data is
the internet, which is really terrible.
There's a huge amount of gains to be
made because the internet is terrible.
Even the internet, when you and I think of
the internet, you're thinking of like The
Wall Street Journal. That's not what this
is. When you're looking at a pre-training
dataset in the frontier lab and you look at a
random internet document, it's total garbage.
I don't even know how this works at all.
It's some like stock tickers, symbols,
it's a huge amount of slop and garbage
from like all the corners of the internet.
It's not like your Wall Street Journal
article, that's extremely rare.
So because the internet is so terrible, we have
to build really big models to compress all that.
Most of that compression is memory
work instead of cognitive work.
But what we really want is the
cognitive part, delete the memory.
I guess what I'm saying is that we need
intelligent models to help us refine even
the pre-training set to just narrow
it down to the cognitive components.
Then I think you get away with a
much smaller model because it's a
much better dataset and you could train it on it.
But probably it's not trained directly on it, it's
probably distilled from a much better model still.
But why is the distilled version still a billion?
I just feel like distillation
works extremely well.
So almost every small model, if you have a
small model, it's almost certainly distilled.
Right, but why is the distillation in
10 years not getting below 1 billion?
Oh, you think it should be smaller than a
billion? I mean, come on, right? I don't
know. At some point it should take at least
a billion knobs to do something interesting.
You're thinking it should be even smaller?
Yeah. If you look at the trend over the last
few years of just finding low-hanging fruit and
going from trillion plus models to models that
are literally two orders of magnitude smaller in a
matter of two years and having better performance,
it makes me think the sort of core of
intelligence might be even way, way smaller.
Plenty of room at the bottom,
to paraphrase Feynman.
I feel like I'm already contrarian
by talking about a billion parameter
cognitive core and you're outdoing me.
Maybe we could get a little bit smaller.
I do think that practically speaking, you
want the model to have some knowledge.
You don't want it to be looking up everything
because then you can't think in your head.
You're looking up way too much stuff all the time.
Some basic curriculum needs to be there for
knowledge, but it doesn't have esoteric knowledge.
We're discussing what plausibly
could be the cognitive core.
There's a separate question which is what
will be the size of frontier models over time?
I'm curious if you have predictions.
We had increasing scale up to maybe GPT 4.5 and
now we're seeing decreasing or plateauing scale.
There are many reasons this could be going on.
Do you have a prediction going forward?
Will the biggest models be bigger,
will they be smaller, will they be the same?
I don't have a super strong prediction.
The labs are just being practical.
They have a flops budget and a cost budget.
It just turns out that pre-training is not where
you want to put most of your flops or your cost.
That's why the models have gotten smaller.
They are a bit smaller, the pre-training
stage is smaller, but they make
it up in reinforcement learning,
mid-training, and all this stuff that follows.
They're just being practical in terms of all the
stages and how you get the most bang for the buck.
Forecasting that trend is quite hard.
I do still expect that there's so much
low-hanging fruit. That's my basic expectation.
I have a very wide distribution here.
Do you expect the low-hanging fruit to be
similar in kind to the kinds of things that have
been happening over the last two to five years?
If I look at nanochat versus nanoGPT
and the architectural tweaks you made,
is that the flavor of things you
expect to continue to keep happening?
You're not expecting any giant paradigm shifts.
For the most part, yeah. I expect the
datasets to get much, much better.
When you look at the average datasets,
they're extremely terrible.
They’re so bad that I
don't even know how anything works.
Look at the average example in the training set:
factual mistakes, errors, nonsensical things.
Somehow when you do it at scale,
the noise washes away and you're left with
some of the signal. Datasets will improve
a ton. Everything gets better. Our hardware,
all the kernels for running the hardware and
maximizing what you get with the hardware.
Nvidia is slowly tuning the hardware itself,
Tensor Cores, all that needs to
happen and will continue to happen.
All the kernels will get better and
utilize the chip to the max extent.
All the algorithms will probably improve over
optimization, architecture, and all the modeling
components of how everything is done and what
the algorithms are that we're even training with.
I do expect that nothing dominates. Everything
plus 20%. This is roughly what I've seen.
People have proposed different ways of charting
how much progress we've made towards full AGI.
If you can come up with some line, then you
can see where that line intersects with AGI
and where that would happen on the x-axis.
People have proposed it's the education level.
We had a high schooler, and then they went to
college with RL, and they're going to get a Ph.D.
I don't like that one.
Or they'll propose horizon
length. Maybe they can do tasks that take
a minute, they can do those autonomously.
Then they can autonomously do tasks that take
an hour, a human an hour, a human a week.
How do you think about the relevant y-axis here?
How should we think about how
AI is making progress?
I have two answers to that.
Number one, I'm almost tempted to
reject the question entirely because
I see this as an extension of computing.
Have we talked about how to chart progress
in computing, or how do you chart progress
in computing since the 1970s or whatever?
What is the y-axis? The whole question is
funny from that perspective a little bit.
When people talk about AI and the original AGI
and how we spoke about it when OpenAI started,
AGI was a system you could go to that can do any
economically valuable task at human performance
or better. That was the definition. I
was pretty happy with that at the time.
I've stuck to that definition forever, and
then people have made up all kinds of other
definitions. But I like that definition. The first
concession that people make all the time is they
just take out all the physical stuff because
we're just talking about digital knowledge work.
That's a pretty major concession compared to
the original definition, which was any task
a human can do. I can lift things, etc. AI
can't do that, obviously, but we'll take it.
What fraction of the economy are we taking away
by saying, "Oh, only knowledge work?" I don't know
the numbers. I feel about 10% to 20%, if I had to
guess, is only knowledge work, someone could work
from home and perform tasks, something like that.
It's still a really large market.
What is the size of the
economy, and what is 10% or 20%?
We're still talking about a few trillion
dollars, even in the US, of market share or work.
So it's still a very massive bucket.
Going back to the definition,
what I would be looking for is to
what extent is that definition true?
Are there jobs or lots of tasks?
If we think of tasks as not jobs but tasks.
It's difficult because the problem is society will
refactor based on the tasks that make up jobs,
based on what's automatable or not.
Today, what jobs are replaceable by AI?
A good example recently was Geoff Hinton's
prediction that radiologists would not be
a job anymore, and this turned out
to be very wrong in a bunch of ways.
Radiologists are alive and well and growing,
even though computer vision is really,
really good at recognizing all the different
things that they have to recognize in images.
It's just a messy, complicated job with a
lot of surfaces and dealing with patients
and all this stuff in the context of it.
I don't know that by that definition
AI has made a huge dent yet.
Some of the jobs that I would
be looking for have some features that make it
very amenable to automation earlier than later.
As an example, call center employees
often come up, and I think rightly so.
Call center employees have a number of simplifying
properties with respect to what's automatable
today. Their jobs are pretty simple. It's a
sequence of tasks, and every task looks similar.
You take a phone call with a person, it's
10 minutes of interaction or whatever it is,
probably a bit longer.
In my experience, a lot longer.
You complete some task in some scheme,
and you change some database entries
around or something like that.
So you keep repeating something
over and over again, and that's your job.
You do want to bring in the task horizon—how
long it takes to perform a task—and
then you want to also remove context.
You're not dealing with different parts of
services of companies or other customers.
It's just the database, you,
and a person you're serving.
It's more closed, it's more
understandable, it's purely digital.
So I would be looking for those things.
But even there, I'm not looking
at full automation yet.
I'm looking for an autonomy slider.
I expect that we are not going
to instantly replace people.
We're going to be swapping in
AIs that do 80% of the volume.
They delegate 20% of the volume to humans,
and humans are supervising teams of five AIs
doing the call center work that's more rote.
I would be looking for new interfaces or new
companies that provide some
layer that allows you to manage
some of these AIs that are not yet perfect.
Then I would expect that across the economy.
A lot of jobs are a lot harder
than a call center employee.
With radiologists, I'm totally
speculating and I have no idea what
the actual workflow of a radiologist involves.
But one analogy that might be applicable is when
Waymos were first being rolled out, there'd be a
person sitting in the front seat, and you just had
to have them there to make sure that if something
went really wrong, they're there to monitor.
Even today, people are still watching
to make sure things are going well.
Robotaxi, which was just deployed,
still has a person inside it.
Now we could be in a similar situation where
if you automate 99% of a job, that last 1%
the human has to do is incredibly valuable
because it's bottlenecking everything else.
If it were the case with radiologists, where
the person sitting in the front of Waymo has
to be specially trained for years in order
to provide the last 1%, their wages should
go up tremendously because they're the
one thing bottlenecking wide deployment.
Radiologists, I think their wages have
gone up for similar reasons, if you're
the last bottleneck and you're not fungible.
A Waymo driver might be fungible with others.
So you might see this thing where your wages
go up until you get to 99% and then fall just
like that when the last 1% is gone.
And I wonder if we're seeing similar
things with radiology or salaries of call
center workers or anything like that.
That's an interesting question. I don't think
we're currently seeing that with radiology.
I think radiology is not a good example.
I don't know why Geoff Hinton picked
on radiology because I think it's an
extremely messy, complicated profession.
I would be a lot more interested in what's
happening with call center employees today,
for example, because I would expect a lot
of the rote stuff to be automatable today.
I don't have first-level access to it but
I would be looking for trends of what's
happening with the call center employees.
Some of the things I would also expect
is that maybe they are swapping in AI, but
then I would still wait for a year or two
because I would potentially expect them to
pull back and rehire some of the people.
There's been evidence that that's already been
happening generally in companies that have been
adopting AI, which I think is quite surprising.
I also found what was really surprising. AGI,
right? A thing which would do everything.
We'll take out physical work,
but it should be able to do all knowledge work.
What you would have naively anticipated is that
the way this progression would happen is
that you take a little task that a consultant
is doing, you take that out of the bucket.
You take a little task that an accountant is
doing, you take that out of the bucket.
Then you're just doing this
across all knowledge work.
But instead, if we do believe we're
on the path of AGI with the current paradigm,
the progression is very much not like that.
It does not seem like consultants and accountants
are getting huge productivity improvements.
It's very much like programmers are getting
more and more chiseled away at their work.
If you look at the revenues of these companies,
discounting normal chat revenue—which is similar
to Google or something—just looking at
API revenues, it's dominated by coding.
So this thing which is "general", which
should be able to do any knowledge work,
is just overwhelmingly doing only coding.
It's a surprising way that you would
expect the AGI to be deployed.
There's an interesting point
here. I do believe coding is the perfect
first thing for these LLMs and agents.
That’s because coding has always
fundamentally worked around text.
It's computer terminals and text,
and everything is based around text.
LLMs, the way they're trained
on the Internet, love text.
They're perfect text processors, and there's
all this data out there. It's a perfect fit.
We also have a lot of infrastructure
pre-built for handling code and text.
For example, we have Visual Studio Code
or your favorite IDE showing you code,
and an agent can plug into that.
If an agent has a diff where it made some change,
we suddenly have all this code already that shows
all the differences to a code base using a diff.
It's almost like we've pre-built a
lot of the infrastructure for code.
Contrast that with some of the
things that don't enjoy that at all.
As an example, there are people trying to build
automation not for coding, but for slides.
I saw a company doing slides. That's
much, much harder. The reason it's
much harder is because slides are not text.
Slides are little graphics, they're arranged
spatially, and there's a visual component to it.
Slides don't have this pre-built infrastructure.
For example, if an agent is to make a change to
your slides, how does a thing show you the diff?
How do you see the diff?
There's nothing that shows diffs
for slides. Someone has to build it. Some of these
things are not amenable to AIs as they are, which
are text processors, and code surprisingly is.
I’m not sure that alone explains it.
I personally have tried to get LLMs to be useful
in domains which are just pure language-in,
language-out, like rewriting transcripts,
coming up with clips based on transcripts.
It's very plausible that I didn't do
every single possible thing I could do.
I put a bunch of good examples in context, but
maybe I should have done some kind of fine-tuning.
Our mutual friend, Andy Matuschak, told me that
he tried 50 billion things to try to get models
to be good at writing spaced repetition prompts.
Again, very much language-in, language-out tasks,
the kind of thing that should be dead
center in the repertoire of these LLMs.
He tried in-context learning
with a few-shot examples.
He tried supervised fine-tuning and retrieval.
He could not get them to make
cards to his satisfaction.
So I find it striking that even in language-out
domains, it's very hard to get a lot of economic
value out of these models separate from coding.
I don't know what explains it.
That makes sense. I'm not
saying that anything text is trivial.
I do think that code is pretty structured.
Text is maybe a lot more flowery, and there's
a lot more entropy in text, I would say.
I don't know how else to put it.
Also code is hard, and so people feel quite
empowered by LLMs, even from simple knowledge.
I don't know that I have a very good answer.
Obviously, text makes it much, much easier,
but it doesn't mean that all text is trivial.
How do you think about superintelligence?
Do you expect it to feel qualitatively different
from normal humans or human companies?
I see it as a progression
of automation in society.
Extrapolating the trend of computing, there will
be a gradual automation of a lot of things, and
superintelligence will an extrapolation of that.
We expect more and more autonomous
entities over time that are doing a lot
of the digital work and then eventually even
the physical work some amount of time later.
Basically I see it as just
automation, roughly speaking.
But automation includes the things humans
can already do, and superintelligence
implies things humans can’t do.
But one of the things that people
do is invent new things, which I would just
put into the automation if that makes sense.
But I guess, less abstractly and more
qualitatively, do you expect something
to feel like… Because this thing can either think
so fast, or has so many copies, or the copies can
merge back into themselves, or is much smarter,
any number of advantages an AI might have, will
the civilization in which these AIs exist
just feel qualitatively different from humans?
I think it will. It is fundamentally automation,
but it will be extremely foreign. It will look
really strange. Like you mentioned, we can run
all of this on a computer cluster and much faster.
Some of the scenarios that I start to get
nervous about when the world looks like
that is this gradual loss of control
and understanding of what's happening.
I think that's the most likely outcome, that
there will be a gradual loss of understanding.
We'll gradually layer all this stuff
everywhere, and there will be fewer
and fewer people who understand it.
Then there will be a gradual loss of
control and understanding of what's happening.
That to me seems the most likely outcome of how
all this stuff will go down.
Let me probe on that a bit.
It's not clear to me that loss of control and
loss of understanding are the same things.
A board of directors at TSMC, Intel—name a random
company—they're just prestigious 80-year-olds.
They have very little understanding, and maybe
they don't practically actually have control.
A better example
is the President of the United States.
The President has a lot of fucking power.
I'm not trying to make a good statement
about the current operant, or maybe I am,
but the actual level of understanding is
very different from the level of control.
I think that's fair. That's a good
pushback. I think I expect loss of both.
How come? Loss of understanding is
obvious, but why loss of control?
We're really far into a territory where I
don't know what this looks like, but if I
were to write sci-fi novels, they would look along
the lines of not even a single entity that takes
over everything, but multiple competing entities
that gradually become more and more autonomous.
Some of them go rogue and
the others fight them off.
It's this hot pot of completely autonomous
activity that we've delegated to.
I feel it would have that flavor.
It is not the fact that they are smarter
than us that is resulting in the loss of control.
It's the fact that they are competing with each
other, and whatever arises out of that
competition leads to the loss of control.
A lot of these things, they will be
tools to people, they're acting on
behalf of people or something like that.
So maybe those people are in control,
but maybe it's a loss of control overall for
society in the sense of outcomes we want.
You have entities acting on behalf of individuals
that are still roughly seen as out of control.
This is a question I should have asked earlier.
We were talking about how currently it feels like
when you're doing AI engineering or AI research,
these models are more in the category of compiler
rather than in the category of a replacement.
At some point, if you have AGI,
it should be able to do what you do.
Do you feel like having a million
copies of you in parallel results in
some huge speed-up of AI progress?
If that does happen, do you expect to see an
intelligence explosion once we have a true AGI?
I'm not talking about LLMs today.
I do, but it's business as usual because
we're in an intelligence explosion
already and have been for decades.
It's basically the GDP curve that is
an exponential weighted sum over so
many aspects of the industry.
Everything is gradually being
automated and has been for hundreds of years.
The Industrial Revolution is automation and
some of the physical components and
tool building and all this stuff.
Compilers are early software
automation, et cetera.
We've been recursively self-improving
and exploding for a long time.
Another way to see it is that Earth was a pretty
boring place if you don't look at the biomechanics
and so on, and looked very similar.
If you look from space, we're in the
middle of this firecracker event,
but we're seeing it in slow motion.
I definitely feel like this has
already happened for a very long time.
Again, I don't see AI as a distinct
technology with respect to what has
already been happening for a long time.
You think it's continuous with this
hyper-exponential trend?
Yes. That's why this was
very interesting to me, because I was
trying to find AI in the GDP for a while.
I thought that GDP should go up.
But then I looked at some of the
other technologies that I thought
were very transformative, like
computers or mobile phones or et cetera.
You can't find them in GDP. GDP is the same
exponential. Even the early iPhone didn't have the
App Store, and it didn't have a lot of the bells
and whistles that the modern iPhone has.
So even though we think of 2008,
when the iPhone came out, as this major
seismic change, it's actually not.
Everything is so spread out and it so
slowly diffuses that everything ends up
being averaged up into the same exponential.
It's the exact same thing with computers.
You can't find them in the GDP
like, "Oh, we have computers now."
That's not what happened, because
it's such slow progression.
With AI we're going to see the exact same thing.
It's just more automation. It allows us to write
different kinds of programs that we couldn't write
before, but AI is still fundamentally a program.
It's a new kind of computer and
a new kind of computing system.
But it has all these problems,
it's going to diffuse over time,
and it's still going to add
up to the same exponential.
We're still going to have an exponential
that's going to get extremely vertical.
It's going to be very foreign to
live in that kind of an environment.
Are you saying that, if you look at the trend
before the Industrial Revolution to now,
you have a hyper-exponential where you go
from 0% growth to then 10,000 years ago,
0.02% growth, and to now when we're at 2%
growth. That's a hyper-exponential. Are you
saying if you're charting AI on there, then
AI takes you to 20% growth or 200% growth?
Or are you saying that if you look at
the last 300 years, what you've been
seeing is that you have technology after
technology—computers, electrification,
steam engines, railways, et cetera—but the
rate of growth is the exact same, it's 2%.
Are you saying the rate of growth will go up?
The rate of growth has also stayed
roughly constant, right?
Only over the last 200, 300 years.
But over the course of
human history it's exploded.
It's gone from 0% to faster, faster,
faster. Industrial explosion, 2%.
For a while I tried to find AI
or look for AI in the GDP curve,
and I've convinced myself that this is false.
Even when people talk about recursive
self-improvement and labs and stuff
like that, this is business as usual.
Of course it's going to recursively self-improve,
and it's been recursively self-improving.
LLMs allow the engineers to work much more
efficiently to build the next round of LLM,
and a lot more of the components are
being automated and tuned and et cetera.
All the engineers having access
to Google Search is part of it.
All the engineers having an IDE, all of them
having autocomplete or having Claude code,
et cetera, it's all just part of the same
speed-up of the whole thing. It's just so smooth.
Just to clarify, you're saying that
the rate of growth will not change.
The intelligence explosion will show up as
it just enabled us to continue staying on the
2% growth trajectory, just as the Internet
helped us stay on the 2% growth trajectory.
Yes, my expectation is that
it stays in the same pattern.
Just to throw the opposite argument against you,
my expectation is that it blows up because I think
true AGI—and I'm not talking about LLM coding
bots, I'm talking about actual replacement of a
human in a server—is qualitatively different
from these other productivity-improving
technologies because it's labor itself.
I think we live in a very labor-constrained world.
If you talk to any startup founder or any person,
you can be like, what do you need more of? You
need really talented people. And if you have
billions of extra people who are inventing stuff,
integrating themselves, making companies bottom
start to finish, that feels qualitatively
different from a single technology.
It's as if you get 10 billion
extra people on the planet.
Maybe a counterpoint. I'm pretty willing
to be convinced one way or another on this point.
But I will say, for example, computing is labor.
Computing was labor. Computers, a lot
of jobs disappeared because computers
are automating a bunch of digital information
processing that you now don't need a human for.
So computers are labor, and that has played out.
Self-driving as an example is also computers doing
labor. That's already been playing
out. It's still business as usual.
You have a machine which is spitting out more
things like that at potentially faster pace.
Historically, we have examples
of the growth regime changing
where you went from 0.2% growth to 2% growth.
It seems very plausible to me that a machine which
is then spitting out the next self-driving
car and the next Internet and whatever…
I see where it's coming from.
At the same time, I do feel like
people make this assumption of, "We
have God in a box, and now it can do
everything," and it just won't look like that.
It's going to be able to do some of the things.
It's going to fail at some other things.
It's going to be gradually put into society,
and we'll end up with the same pattern. That
is my prediction. This assumption of suddenly
having a completely intelligent, fully flexible,
fully general human in a box, and we can dispense
it at arbitrary problems in society, I don't
think that we will have this discrete change.
I think we'll arrive at the same kind of
gradual diffusion of this across the industry.
It often ends up being misleading
in these conversations.
I don't like to use the word intelligence in
this context because intelligence implies you
think there'll be a single superintelligence
sitting in a server and it'll divine how
to come up with new technologies and
inventions that cause this explosion.
That's not what I'm imagining
when I'm imagining 20% growth.
I'm imagining that there are billions of
very smart human-like minds, potentially,
or that's all that's required.
But the fact that there's hundreds
of millions of them, billions of them, each
individually making new products, figuring
out how to integrate themselves into the economy.
If a highly experienced smart immigrant came to
the country, you wouldn't need to figure out how
we integrate them in the economy. They figure it
out. They could start a company, they could make
inventions, or increase productivity in the world.
We have examples, even in the current regime,
of places that have had 10-20% economic growth.
If you just have a lot of people and
less capital in comparison to the people,
you can have Hong Kong or Shenzhen or
whatever with decades of 10% plus growth.
There's a lot of really smart people who are
ready to make use of the resources and do
this period of catch-up because we've had this
discontinuity, and I think AI might be similar.
I understand, but I still think that
you're presupposing some discrete jump.
There's some unlock that we're waiting to claim.
And suddenly we're going to have
geniuses in data centers.
I still think you're presupposing
some discrete jump that has no historical
precedent that I can't find in any of the
statistics and that I think probably won't happen.
I mean, the Industrial Revolution is such a jump.
You went from 0.2% growth to 2% growth.
I'm just saying you'll see another jump like that.
I'm a little bit suspicious,
I would have to take a look.
For example, some of the logs are not very
good from before the Industrial Revolution.
I'm a bit suspicious of it but
I don't have strong opinions.
You're saying that this was a singular
event that was extremely magical.
You're saying that maybe there's going
to be another event that's going to
be just like that, extremely magical.
It will break the paradigm, and so on.
I actually don't think… The crucial thing with the
Industrial Revolution was that it was not magical.
If you just zoomed in, what you would see in 1770
or 1870 is not that there was some key invention.
But at the same time, you did move the
economy to a regime where the progress
was much faster and the exponential 10x'd.
I expect a similar thing from AI where it's
not like there's going to be a single moment
where we've made the crucial invention.
It’s an overhang that's being unlocked.
Like maybe there's a new energy source.
There's some unlock—in this case, some kind of
a cognitive capacity—and there's an overhang of
cognitive work to do.
That's right.
You're expecting that overhang to be filled by
this new technology when it crosses the threshold.
Maybe one way to think about it is
throughout history, a lot of growth
comes because people come up with ideas,
and then people are out there doing stuff to
execute those ideas and make valuable output.
Through most of this time, the population has
been exploding. That has been driving
growth. For the last 50 years, people
have argued that growth has stagnated.
The population in frontier countries
has also stagnated.
I think we go back to
the exponential growth in population that
causes hyper-exponential growth in output.
It's really hard to tell. I
understand that viewpoint. I
don't intuitively feel that viewpoint.
You recommended Nick Lane's book to me.
On that basis, I also found it super
interesting and I interviewed him.
I have some questions about thinking about
intelligence and evolutionary history.
Now that you, over the last 20 years of doing AI
research, you maybe have a more tangible sense of
what intelligence is, what it takes to develop it.
Are you more or less surprised as a result that
evolution just spontaneously stumbled upon it?
I love Nick Lane's books. I was just listening
to his podcast on the way up here.
With respect to intelligence and its
evolution, it's very, very recent.
I am surprised that it evolved.
I find it fascinating to think
about all the worlds out there.
Say there's a thousand planets
like Earth and what they look like.
I think Nick Lane was here talking
about some of the earliest parts.
He expects very similar life
forms, roughly speaking,
and bacteria-like things in most of them.
There are a few breaks in there.
The evolution of intelligence intuitively feels
to me like it should be a fairly rare event.
Maybe you should base it on
how long something has existed.
If bacteria were around for 2 billion years
and nothing happened, then going to eukaryote
is probably pretty hard because bacteria came
up quite early in Earth's evolution or history.
How long have we had animals?
Maybe a couple hundred million years,
multicellular animals that
run around, crawl, et cetera.
That’s maybe 10% of Earth's lifespan.
Maybe on that timescale it's not too tricky.
It's still surprising to me,
intuitively, that it developed.
I would maybe expect just a lot of animal-like
life forms doing animal-like things.
The fact that you can get something
that creates culture and knowledge
and accumulates it is surprising to me.
There's a couple of interesting follow-ups.
If you buy the Sutton perspective that the
crux of intelligence is animal intelligence…
The quote he said is "If you got to the
squirrel, you'd be most of the way to AGI."
We got to squirrel intelligence right after
the Cambrian explosion 600 million years ago.
It seems like what instigated that was the
oxygenation event 600 million years ago.
But immediately the intelligence algorithm
was there to make the squirrel intelligence.
It's suggestive that animal
intelligence was like that.
As soon as you had the oxygen in the
environment, you had the eukaryote,
you could just get the algorithm.
Maybe it was an accident that
evolution stumbled upon it so fast,
but I don't know if that suggests that
at the end it's going to be quite simple.
It's so hard to tell with any of this stuff.
You can base it a bit on how long
something has existed or how long
it feels like something has been bottlenecked.
Nick Lane is very good about describing this very
apparent bottleneck in bacteria and archaea.
For two billion years, nothing happened.
There’s extreme diversity of biochemistry,
and yet nothing grows to become animals.
Two billion years. I don't know that we've
seen exactly that kind of an equivalent with
animals and intelligence, to your point.
We could also look at it with respect
to how many times we think certain
intelligence has individually sprung up.
That's a really good thing to investigate.
One thought on that. There's hominid intelligence,
and then there's bird intelligence.
Ravens, etc., are extremely clever,
but their brain parts are quite distinct,
and we don't have that much in common.
That's a slight indication of maybe
intelligence springing up a few times.
In that case, you'd expect it more frequently.
A former guest, Gwern, and Carl Shulman, they’ve
made a really interesting point about that.
Their perspective is that the scalable algorithm
which humans have and primates have, arose in
birds as well, and maybe other times as well.
But humans found an evolutionary niche which
rewarded marginal increases in intelligence
and also had a scalable brain algorithm that
could achieve those increases in intelligence.
For example, if a bird had a bigger brain,
it would just collapse out of the air.
It's very smart for the size of
its brain, but it's not in a niche
which rewards the brain getting bigger.
It’s maybe similar to some really smart…
Like dolphins?
Exaclty, humans, we have hands that
reward being able to learn how to do tool use.
We can externalize digestion, more energy to
the brain, and that kicks off the flywheel.
Also stuff to work with. I'm guessing it would
be harder if I were a dolphin. How do you have
fire? The universe of things you can do in water,
inside water, is probably lower than
what you can do on land, just chemically.
I do agree with this viewpoint of these niches
and what's being incentivized. I still find it
miraculous. I would have expected things to
get stuck on animals with bigger muscles.
Going through intelligence is a
really fascinating breaking point.
The way Gwern put it is the reason it was so hard
is that it's a very tight line between being in
a situation where something is so important
to learn that it's not worth distilling the
exact right circuits directly back into your DNA,
versus it's not important enough to learn at all.
It has to be something that incentivizes
building the algorithm to learn in a lifetime.
You have to incentivize some kind of adaptability.
You want environments that are unpredictable
so evolution can't bake your
algorithms into your weights.
A lot of animals are pre-baked in this sense.
Humans have to figure it out at test
time when they get born.
You want these environments
that change really rapidly, where you
can't foresee what will work well.
You create intelligence to
figure it out at test time.
Quintin Pope had this interesting blog post
where he's saying the reason he doesn't
expect a sharp takeoff is that humans had the
sharp takeoff where 60,000 years ago we seem
to have had the cognitive architectures
that we have today. 10,000 years ago,
agricultural revolution, modernity.
What was happening in that 50,000 years?
You had to build this cultural scaffold where
you can accumulate knowledge over generations.
This is an ability that exists for
free in the way we do AI training.
In many cases they are literally distilled.
If you retrain a model, they can be trained
on each other, they can be trained
on the same pre-training corpus,
they don't literally have to start from scratch.
There's a sense in which it took humans a long
time to get this cultural loop going, but it just
comes for free with the way we do LLM training.
Yes and no. Because LLMs don't really
have the equivalent of culture.
Maybe we're giving them way too
much and incentivizing not to
create it or something like that.
But the invention of culture and of
written record and of passing down notes
between each other, I don't think there's
an equivalent of that with LLMs right now.
LLMs don't really have culture right now and
it's one of the impediments I would say.
Can you give me some sense of what
LLM culture might look like?
In the simplest case it would be a
giant scratchpad that the LLM can edit and as it's
reading stuff or as it's helping out with work,
it's editing the scratchpad for itself.
Why can't an LLM write a book for the other
LLMs? That would be cool. Why can't other
LLMs read this LLM's book and be inspired
by it or shocked by it or something like that?
There's no equivalence for any of this stuff.
Interesting. When would you expect
that kind of thing to start happening?
Also, multi-agent systems and a sort of
independent AI civilization and culture?
There are two powerful ideas in the
realm of multi-agent that have both
not been really claimed or so on.
The first one I would say is culture
and LLMs having a growing repertoire
of knowledge for their own purposes.
The second one looks a lot more
like the powerful idea of self-play.
In my mind it’s extremely powerful.
Evolution has a lot of competition
driving intelligence and evolution.
In AlphaGo more algorithmically,
AlphaGo is playing against itself and that's
how it learns to get really good at Go.
There's no equivalent of self-playing LLMs,
but I would expect that to also exist.
No one has done it yet.
Why can't an LLM for example, create a bunch
of problems that another LLM is learning to solve?
Then the LLM is always trying to serve more and
more difficult problems, stuff like that.
There's a bunch of ways to organize it.
It's a realm of research, but I haven't
seen anything that convincingly claims
both of those multi-agent improvements.
We're mostly in the realm of a single
individual agent, but that will change.
In the realm of culture also,
I would also bucket organizations.
We haven't seen anything like that convincingly
either. That's why we're still early.
Can you identify the key bottleneck
that's preventing this kind
of collaboration between LLMs?
Maybe the way I would put it is,
some of these analogies work and
they shouldn't, but somehow, remarkably, they do.
A lot of the smaller models, or the dumber models,
remarkably resemble a kindergarten student, or an
elementary school student or high school student.
Somehow, we still haven't graduated
enough where this stuff can take over.
My Claude Code or Codex, they still
feel like this elementary-grade student.
I know that they can take PhD quizzes,
but they still cognitively feel like a
kindergarten or an elementary school student.
I don't think they can create culture because
they're still kids. They're savant kids.
They have perfect memory of all this stuff.
They can convincingly create all
kinds of slop that looks really good.
But I still think they don't really know
what they're doing and they don't really
have the cognition across all these little
checkboxes that we still have to collect.
You've talked about how you were at Tesla
leading self-driving from 2017 to 2022.
And you firsthand saw this progress from cool
demos to now thousands of cars out there actually
autonomously doing drives.
Why did that take a decade?
What was happening through that time?
One thing I will almost instantly push
back on is that this is not even near done,
in a bunch of ways that I'm going to get to.
Self-driving is very interesting because
it's definitely where I get a lot of my
intuitions because I spent five years on it.
It has this entire history where the first demos
of self-driving go all the way to the 1980s.
You can see a demo from CMU in 1986.
There's a truck that's driving itself on
roads. Fast forward. When I was joining Tesla,
I had a very early demo of Waymo.
It basically gave me a perfect drive
in 2014 or something like that, so
a perfect Waymo drive a decade ago.
It took us around Palo Alto and so on
because I had a friend who worked there.
I thought it was very close and
then it still took a long time.
For some kinds of tasks and jobs and so on,
there's a very large demo-to-product gap where the
demo is very easy, but the product is very hard.
It's especially the case in cases like
self-driving where the cost
of failure is too high.
Many industries, tasks, and jobs maybe don't have
that property, but when you do have that property,
that definitely increases the timelines.
For example, in software engineering,
I do think that property does exist.
For a lot of vibe coding, it doesn't.
But if you're writing actual production-grade
code, that property should exist, because any
kind of mistake leads to a security
vulnerability or something like that.
Millions and hundreds of millions of
people's personal Social Security numbers
get leaked or something like that.
So in software, people should be careful,
kind of like in self-driving.
In self-driving, if things go wrong,
you might get injured. There are worse
outcomes. But in software, it's almost
unbounded how terrible something could be.
I do think that they share that property.
What takes the long amount of time and the way
to think about it is that it's a march of nines.
Every single nine is a constant amount of work.
Every single nine is the same amount of work.
When you get a demo and something works 90%
of the time, that's just the first nine.
Then you need the second nine, a third
nine, a fourth nine, a fifth nine.
While I was at Tesla for five years or so, we
went through maybe three nines or two nines.
I don't know what it is, but
multiple nines of iteration.
There are still more nines to go.
That's why these things take so long.
It's definitely formative for me, seeing
something that was a demo. I'm very
unimpressed by demos. Whenever I see demos of
anything, I'm extremely unimpressed by that.
If it's a demo that someone cooked
up as a showing, it's worse.
If you can interact with it, it's a bit better.
But even then, you're not done. You need the
actual product. It's going to face all these
challenges when it comes in contact
with reality and all these different
pockets of behavior that need patching.
We're going to see all this stuff play
out. It's a march of nines. Each nine is
constant. Demos are encouraging. It’s still
a huge amount of work to do.
It is a critical safety domain,
unless you're doing vibe coding,
which is all nice and fun and so on.
That's why this also enforced my
timelines from that perspective.
It's very interesting to hear you say that, that
the safety guarantees you need from software
are not dissimilar to self-driving.
What people will often say is that
self-driving took so long because
the cost of failure is so high.
A human makes a mistake on average every
400,000 miles or every seven years.
If you had to release a coding agent that
couldn't make a mistake for at least seven years,
it would be much harder to deploy.
But your point is that if you made a
catastrophic coding mistake, like breaking
some important system every seven years...
Very easy to do.
In fact, in terms of wall clock time,
it would be much less than seven years because
you're constantly outputting code like that.
In terms of tokens, it would be seven years.
But in terms of wall clock time...
In some ways, it's a much harder problem.
Self-driving is just one of
thousands of things that people do.
It's almost like a single vertical, I suppose.
Whereas when we're talking about
general software engineering,
it's even more... There's more surface area.
There's another objection people make to that
analogy, which is that with self-driving, what
took a big fraction of that time was solving
the problem of having basic perception
that's robust, building representations,
and having a model that has some common
sense so it can generalize to when it sees
something that's slightly out of distribution.
If somebody's waving down the road this way,
you don't need to train for it.
The thing will have some understanding
of how to respond to something like that.
These are things we're getting for free
with LLMs or VLMs today, so we don't have to
solve these very basic representation problems.
So now deploying AIs across different domains
will sort of be like deploying a self-driving
car with current models to a different city,
which is hard but not like a 10-year-long task.
I'm not 100% sure if I fully agree with that.
I don't know how much we're getting for free.
There's still a lot of gaps in
understanding what we are getting.
We're definitely getting more
generalizable intelligence in a
single entity, whereas self-driving is a
very special-purpose task that requires.
In some sense building a special-purpose task
is maybe even harder in a certain sense because
it doesn't fall out from a more general thing
that you're doing at scale, if that makes sense.
But the analogy still doesn't fully
resonate because the LLMs are still
pretty fallible and they have a lot of
gaps that still need to be filled in.
I don't think that we're
getting magical generalization
completely out of the box, in a certain sense.
The other aspect that I wanted to return to is
that self-driving cars are nowhere near done
still. The deployments are pretty minimal.
Even Waymo and so on has very few cars.
They're doing that roughly speaking
because they're not economical.
They've built something that lives in the future.
They've had to pull back the future,
but they had to make it uneconomical.
There are all these costs, not just
marginal costs for those cars and
their operation and maintenance, but
also the capex of the entire thing.
Making it economical is still
going to be a slog for them.
Also, when you look at these cars and
there's no one driving, I actually think
it's a little bit deceiving because there
are very elaborate teleoperation centers
of people kind of in a loop with these cars.
I don't have the full extent of it, but there's
more human-in-the-loop than you might expect.
There are people somewhere out there
beaming in from the sky.
I don't know if they're
fully in the loop with the driving.
Some of the time they are, but they're
certainly involved and there are people.
In some sense, we haven't actually removed
the person, we've moved them to
somewhere where you can't see them.
I still think there will be some work, as you
mentioned, going from environment to environment.
There are still challenges
to make self-driving real.
But I do agree that it's definitely crossed
a threshold where it kind of feels real,
unless it's really teleoperated.
For example, Waymo can't go to
all the different parts of the city.
My suspicion is that it's parts of the city
where you don't get good signal.
Anyway, I don't know anything
about the stack. I'm just making stuff up.
You led self-driving for five years at Tesla.
Sorry, I don't know anything
about the specifics of Waymo.
By the way, I love Waymo
and I take it all the time.
I just think that people are sometimes a
little bit too naive about some of the progress
and there's still a huge amount of work.
Tesla took in my mind a much more scalable
approach and the team is doing extremely well.
I'm kind of on the record for predicting
how this thing will go.
Waymo had an early start
because you can package up so many sensors.
But I do think Tesla is taking the more
scalable strategy and it's going
to look a lot more like that.
So this will still have to play out and hasn't.
But I don't want to talk about self-driving as
something that took a decade because it
didn't take it yet, if that makes sense.
Because one, the start is at 1980 and not 10
years ago, and then two, the end is not here yet.
The end is not near yet because when
we're talking about self-driving,
usually in my mind it's self-driving at scale.
People don't have to get a driver's license, etc.
I'm curious to bounce two other ways in
which the analogy might be different.
The reason I'm especially curious about this is
because the question of how fast AI is deployed,
how valuable it is when it's early
on is potentially the most important
question in the world right now.
If you're trying to model what the
year 2030 looks like, this is the question
you ought to have some understanding of.
Another thing you might think is one, you have
this latency requirement with self-driving.
I have no idea what the actual models are, but I
assume it’s like tens of millions of parameters
or something, which is not the necessary
constraint for knowledge work with LLMs.
Maybe it might be with computer use and stuff.
But the other big one is, maybe more
importantly, on this capex question.
Yes, there is additional cost to serving
up an additional copy of a model, but the opex
of a session is quite low and you can amortize
the cost of AI into the training run itself,
depending on how inference scaling goes and stuff.
But it's certainly not as much as building a whole
new car to serve another instance of a model.
So the economics of deploying more
widely are much more favorable.
I think that's right. If you're
sticking to the realm of bits,
bits are a million times easier than anything
that touches the physical world. I definitely
grant that. Bits are completely changeable,
arbitrarily reshuffleable at a very rapid speed.
You would expect a much faster adaptation also in
the industry and so on. What was the first one?
The latency requirements and
its implications for model size?
I think that's roughly right. I also
think that if we are talking about
knowledge work at scale, there will be some
latency requirements, practically speaking,
because we're going to have to create a
huge amount of compute and serve that.
The last aspect that I very briefly want
to also talk about is all the rest of it.
What does society think about it? What are
the legal ramifications? How is it working
legally? How is it working insurance-wise?
What are those layers of it and aspects of it?
What is the equivalent of people
putting a cone on a Waymo?
There are going to be equivalents of all that.
So I feel like self-driving is a very nice
analogy that you can borrow things from.
What is the equivalent of a cone in the car?
What is the equivalent of a teleoperating worker
who's hidden away and all the aspects of it.
Do you have any opinions on what this
implies about the current AI buildout,
which would 10x the amount of available compute
in the world in a year or two and maybe more
than 100x it by the end of the decade.
If the use of AI will be lower than
some people naively predict, does
that mean that we're overbuilding
compute or is that a separate question?
Kind of like what happened with railroads.
With what, sorry?
Was it railroads or?
Yeah, it was.
Yeah. There's historical precedent.
Or was it with the telecommunication industry?
Pre-paving the internet that only came a decade
later and creating a whole bubble in the
telecommunications industry in the late '90s.
I understand I'm sounding very pessimistic
here. I'm actually optimistic. I think this
will work. I think it's tractable. I'm
only sounding pessimistic because when
I go on my Twitter timeline, I see all
this stuff that makes no sense to me.
There's a lot of reasons for why that exists.
A lot of it is honestly just fundraising.
It's just incentive structures.
A lot of it may be fundraising.
A lot of it is just attention, converting
attention to money on the internet,
stuff like that.
There's a lot of
that going on, and I'm only reacting to that.
But I'm still overall very bullish on technology.
We're going to work through all this stuff.
There's been a rapid amount of progress.
I don't know that there's overbuilding.
I think we're going to be able to gobble up what,
in my understanding, is being built.
For example, Claude Code or OpenAI Codex
and stuff like that didn't even
exist a year ago. Is that right?
This is a miraculous technology that didn't exist.
There's going to be a huge amount of demand,
as we see the demand in ChatGPT already and so on.
So I don't know that there's overbuilding.
I'm just reacting to some of the very fast
timelines that people continue to say incorrectly.
I've heard many, many times over the course
of my 15 years in AI where very reputable
people keep getting this wrong all the time.
I want this to be properly calibrated, and some
of this also has geopolitical ramifications and
things like that with some of these questions.
I don't want people to make
mistakes in that sphere of things.
I do want us to be grounded in the
reality of what technology is and isn't.
Let's talk about education and Eureka.
One thing you could do is start another AI
lab and then try to solve those problems.
I’m curious what you're up to now,
and why not AI research itself?
I guess the way I would put it
is I feel some amount of determinism
around the things that AI labs are doing.
I feel like I could help out there, but I
don't know that I would uniquely improve it.
My personal big fear is that a lot of this
stuff happens on the side of humanity,
and that humanity gets disempowered by it.
I care not just about all the Dyson spheres
that we're going to build and that AI is
going to build in a fully autonomous way,
I care about what happens to humans.
I want humans to be well off in the future.
I feel like that's where I can a
lot more uniquely add value than
an incremental improvement in the frontier lab.
I'm most afraid of something depicted in movies
like WALL-E or Idiocracy or something like that,
where humanity is on the side of this stuff.
I want humans to be much,
much better in this future.
To me, this is through education
that you can achieve this.
So what are you working on there?
The easiest way I can describe it is
we're trying to build the Starfleet Academy.
I don’t know if you’ve watched Star Trek.
I haven’t.
Starfleet Academy is
this elite institution for frontier technology,
building spaceships, and graduating cadets to be
the pilots of these spaceships and whatnot.
So I just imagine an elite institution for
technical knowledge and a kind of school that's
very up-to-date and a premier institution.
A category of questions I have for you is
explaining how one teaches technical or
scientific content well, because you
are one of the world masters at it.
I'm curious both about how you think about
it for content you've already put out there
on YouTube, but also, to the extent it's any
different, how you think about it for Eureka.
With respect to Eureka, one thing that
is very fascinating to me about education
is that I do think education will pretty
fundamentally change with AIs on the side.
It has to be rewired and changed to some extent.
I still think that we're pretty early.
There's going to be a lot of people who
are going to try to do the obvious things.
Have an LLM and ask it questions.
Do all the basic things that you would
do via prompting right now.
It's helpful,
but it still feels to me a bit like slop.
I'd like to do it properly, and I think the
capability is not there for what I would want.
What I'd want is an actual tutor experience.
A prominent example in my mind is I was
recently learning Korean, so language learning.
I went through a phase where I was
learning Korean by myself on the internet.
I went through a phase where I was part of a small
class in Korea taking Korean with a bunch of other
people, which was really funny.
We had a teacher and 10
people or so taking Korean.
Then I switched to a one-on-one tutor.
I guess what was fascinating to me was, I think
I had a really good tutor, but just thinking
through what this tutor was doing for me and how
incredible that experience was and how high the
bar is for what I want to build eventually.
Instantly from a very short
conversation, she understood where I am
as a student, what I know and don't know.
She was able to probe exactly the kinds of
questions or things to understand my world model.
No LLM will do that for you
100% right now, not even close.
But a tutor will do that if they're good.
Once she understands, she really served
me all the things that I needed at
my current sliver of capability.
I need to be always appropriately challenged.
I can't be faced with something too hard or
too trivial, and a tutor is really good
at serving you just the right stuff.
I felt like I was the only constraint to learning.
I was always given the perfect information. I'm
the only constraint. I felt good because
I'm the only impediment that exists.
It's not that I can't find knowledge or
that it's not properly explained or etc.
It's just my ability to memorize and so on.
This is what I want for people.
How do you automate that?
Very good question. At
the current capability, you don't.
That's why I think it's not actually the
right time to build this kind of an AI tutor.
I still think it's a useful product,
and lots of people will build it, but the bar
is so high and the capability is not there.
Even today, I would say ChatGPT is an
extremely valuable educational product.
But for me, it was so fascinating
to see how high the bar is.
When I was with her, I almost felt
like there's no way I can build this.
But you are building it, right?
Anyone who's had a really good
tutor is like, "How are you going to build
this?" I'm waiting for that capability. I
did some AI consulting for computer vision.
A lot of times, the value that I brought to
the company was telling them not to use AI.
I was the AI expert, and they described the
problem, and I said, "Don't use AI."
This is my value add. I feel like it's
the same in education right now, where
I feel like for what I have in mind,
it's not yet the time, but the time will come.
For now, I'm building something that looks
maybe a bit more conventional that has a
physical and digital component and so on.
But it's obvious how this
should look in the future.
To the extent you're willing to
say, what is the thing you hope
will be released this year or next year?
I'm building the first course. I want to
have a really, really good course, the
obvious state-of-the-art destination
you go to to learn, AI in this case.
That's just what I'm familiar with, so it's
a really good first product to get to be really
good at it. So that's what I'm building. Nanochat,
which you briefly mentioned, is a capstone project
of LLM101N, which is a class that I'm building.
That's a really big piece of it.
But now I have to build out a lot of
the intermediates, and then I have to hire a small
team of TAs and so on and build the entire course.
One more thing that I would say is that many
times, when people think about education,
they think more about what I would say is
a softer component of diffusing knowledge.
I have something very hard and technical in mind.
In my mind, education is the very difficult
technical process of building ramps to knowledge.
In my mind, nanochat is a ramp to
knowledge because it's very simple.
It's the super simplified full-stack thing.
If you give this artifact to someone and they
look through it, they're learning a ton of stuff.
It's giving you a lot of what I call eurekas
per second, which is understanding per second.
That's what I want, lots of eurekas per second.
So to me, this is a technical problem of
how do we build these ramps to knowledge.
So I almost think of Eureka as maybe not that
different from some of the frontier labs
or some of the work that's going on there.
I want to figure out how to build these
ramps very efficiently so that people are
never stuck and everything is always
not too hard or not too trivial, and
you have just the right material to progress.
You're imagining in the short term that instead
of a tutor being able to probe your understanding,
if you have enough self-awareness to be able to
probe yourself, you're never going to be stuck.
You can find the right answer between talking
to the TA or talking to an LLM and
looking at the reference implementation.
It sounds like automation or
AI is not a significant part.
So far, the big alpha here is your
ability to explain AI codified
in the source material of the class.
That's fundamentally what the course is.
You always have to be calibrated to
what capability exists in the industry.
A lot of people are going to
pursue just asking ChatGPT, etc.
But I think right now, for example, if you go to
ChatGPT and you say, teach me AI, there's no way.
It's going to give you some slop.
AI is never going to write nanochat right now.
But nanochat is a really
useful intermediate point.
I'm collaborating with AI
to create all this material,
so AI is still fundamentally very helpful.
Earlier on, I built CS231n at Stanford,
which I think was the first deep learning
class at Stanford, which became very popular.
The difference in building out 231n
then and LLM101N now is quite stark.
I feel really empowered by the LLMs as they
exist right now, but I'm very much in the loop.
They're helping me build the
materials, I go much faster.
They're doing a lot of the boring stuff, etc.
I feel like I'm developing the course much faster,
and it's LLM-infused, but it's not yet at a
place where it can creatively create the content.
I'm still there to do that.
The trickiness is always
calibrating yourself to what exists.
When you imagine what is available
through Eureka in a couple of years, it
seems like the big bottleneck is going to be
finding Karpathys in field after field who can
convert their understanding into these ramps.
It would change over time. Right now,
it would be hiring faculty to help work
hand-in-hand with AI and a team of people
probably to build state-of-the-art courses.
Over time maybe some of the TAs can become AIs.
You just take all the course materials and then
I think you could serve a very good automated
TA for the student when they have more basic
questions or something like that.
But I think you'll need faculty
for the overall architecture of a
course and making sure that it fits.
So I see a progression of how this will evolve.
Maybe at some future point I'm not even that
useful and AI is doing most of the
design much better than I could.
But I still think that's going
to take some time to play out.
Are you imagining that people who have expertise
in other fields are then contributing courses,
or do you feel like it's quite
essential to the vision that you,
given your understanding of how you want to
teach, are the one designing the content?
Sal Khan is narrating all
the videos on Khan Academy.
Are you imagining something like that?
No, I will hire faculty because there
are domains in which I'm not an expert.
That's the only way to offer the state-of-the-art
experience for the student ultimately.
I do expect that I would hire faculty, but
I will probably stick around in AI for some time.
I do have something more conventional in mind for
the current capability than what
people would probably anticipate.
When I'm building Starfleet Academy, I do probably
imagine a physical institution, and maybe a tier
below that a digital offering that is not the
state-of-the-art experience you would get when
someone comes in physically full-time and we
work through material from start to end and
make sure you understand it. That's the physical
offering. The digital offering is a bunch of stuff
on the internet and maybe some LLM assistant.
It's a bit more gimmicky in a tier below, but
at least it's accessible to 8 billion people.
I think you're basically inventing college
from first principles for the tools that
are available today and just selecting
for people who have the motivation and the
interest of really engaging with material.
There's going to have to be a lot of not
just education but also re-education.
I would love to help out there because
the jobs will probably change quite a bit.
For example, today a lot of people are
trying to upskill in AI specifically.
I think it's a really good
course to teach in this respect.
Motivation-wise, before AGI motivation is very
simple to solve because people want to make money.
This is how you make money in the industry today.
Post-AGI is a lot more interesting possibly
because if everything is automated
and there's nothing to do for anyone,
why would anyone go to a school?
I often say that pre-AGI education
is useful. Post-AGI education is fun. In
a similar way, people go to the gym today.
We don't need their physical strength
to manipulate heavy objects because we
have machines that do that.
They still go to the gym.
Why do they go to the gym?
Because it's fun, it's healthy,
and you look hot when you have a six-pack.
It's attractive for people to do that
in a very deep, psychological,
evolutionary sense for humanity.
Education will play out in the same way.
You'll go to school like you go to the gym.
Right now, not that many people learn
because learning is hard. You bounce
from material. Some people overcome that
barrier, but for most people, it's hard.
It's a technical problem to solve.
It's a technical problem to do what my tutor
did for me when I was learning Korean.
It's tractable and buildable,
and someone should build it.
It's going to make learning
anything trivial and desirable, and people
will do it for fun because it's trivial.
If I had a tutor like that for any arbitrary piece
of knowledge, it's going to be so much easier to
learn anything, and people will do it.
They'll do it for the same
reasons they go to the gym.
That sounds different from using…
So post-AGI, you're using this as
entertainment or as self-betterment.
But it sounded like you had a vision
also that this education is relevant to
keeping humanity in control of AI. That sounds
different. Is it entertaining for some people,
but then empowerment for some others?
How do you think about that?
I do think eventually it's a bit of
a losing game, if that makes sense.
It is in the long term.
In the long term, which
is longer than maybe most people in the
industry think about, it's a losing game.
I do think people can go so far and we've barely
scratched the surface of how much a person can go.
That's just because people are bouncing off
of material that's too easy or too hard.
People will be able to go much further.
Anyone will speak five languages because
why not? Because it's so trivial. Anyone will know
all the basic curriculum of undergrad, et cetera.
Now that I'm understanding the
vision, that's very interesting.
It has a perfect analog in gym culture.
I don't think 100 years
ago anybody would be ripped.
Nobody would have been able to just spontaneously
bench two plates or three plates or something.
It's very common now because of this idea of
systematically training and lifting weights in
the gym, or systematically training to be able
to run a marathon, which is a capability
most humans would not spontaneously have.
You're imagining similar things for
learning across many different domains,
much more intensely, deeply, faster.
Exactly. I am betting a bit implicitly
on some of the timelessness of human nature.
It will be desirable to do all these things,
and I think people will look up
to it as they have for millennia.
This will continue to be true.
There's some evidence of that historically.
If you look at, for example, aristocrats, or you
look at ancient Greece or something like that,
whenever you had little pocket environments
that were post-AGI in a certain sense, people
have spent a lot of their time flourishing in a
certain way, either physically or cognitively.
I feel okay about the prospects of that.
If this is false and I'm wrong and we end up in a
WALL-E or Idiocracy future, then I don't even care
if there are Dyson spheres. This is a terrible
outcome. I really do care about humanity.
Everyone has to just be
superhuman in a certain sense.
It's still a world in which that is not enabling
us to… It's like the culture world, right?
You're not fundamentally going to be able
to transform the trajectory
of technology or influence
decisions by your own labor or cognition alone.
Maybe you can influence decisions because the AI
is asking for your approval, but it's not because
I've invented something or I've come up with a new
design that I'm really influencing the future.
Maybe. I think there will be a transitional
period where we are going to be
able to be in the loop and advance
things if we understand a lot of stuff.
In the long-term, that probably goes away.
It might even become a sport.
Right now you have powerlifters
who go extreme in this direction.
What is powerlifting in a cognitive era?
Maybe it's people who are really trying
to make Olympics out of knowing stuff.
If you have a perfect AI tutor,
maybe you can get extremely far.
I feel that the geniuses of
today are barely scratching the
surface of what a human mind can do, I think.
I love this vision. I also feel like the person
you have the most product-market fit with is me
because my job involves having to learn different
subjects every week, and I am very excited.
I'm similar, for that matter. A lot of people,
for example, hate school and want to get
out of it. I really liked school. I loved
learning things, et cetera.
I wanted to stay in school.
I stayed all the way until Ph.D. and
then they wouldn't let me stay longer,
so I went to the industry.
Roughly speaking, I love learning,
even for the sake of learning, but I also love
learning because it's a form of empowerment and
being useful and productive.
You also made a point that
was subtle and I want to spell it out.
With what’s happened so far with online
courses, why haven't they already enabled us to
enable every single human to know everything?
They're just so motivation-laden because there are
no obvious on-ramps and it's so easy to get stuck.
If you had this thing instead—like a really
good human tutor—it would just be such an
unlock from a motivation perspective.
I think so. It feels bad to bounce from
material. It feels bad. You get negative reward
from sinking an amount of time in something and it
doesn't pan out, or being completely bored because
what you're getting is too easy or too hard.
When you do it properly, learning feels good.
It's a technical problem to get there.
For a while, it's going to be AI plus human
collab, and at some point, maybe it's just AI.
Can I ask some questions about teaching well?
If you had to give advice to another educator
in another field that you're curious about to
make the kinds of YouTube tutorials you've made.
Maybe it might be especially interesting
to talk about domains where you can't
test someone's technical understanding by
having them code something up or something.
What advice would you give them?
That's a pretty broad topic. There are 10–20 tips
and tricks that I semi-consciously do probably.
But a lot of this comes
from my physics background.
I really, really did enjoy my physics background.
I have a whole rant on how everyone
should learn physics in early school
education because early school education is
not about accumulating knowledge or memory
for tasks later in the industry.
It's about booting up a brain.
Physics uniquely boots up the brain the
best because some of the things that they
get you to do in your brain during
physics is extremely valuable later.
The idea of building models and abstractions
and understanding that there's a first-order
approximation that describes most of the system,
but then there're second-order, third-order,
fourth-order terms that may or may not be present.
The idea that you're observing a very noisy
system, but there are these fundamental
frequencies that you can abstract away.
When a physicist walks into the class and
they say, "Assume there's a spherical cow,"
everyone laughs at that, but this is brilliant.
It's brilliant thinking that's very generalizable
across the industry because a cow can be
approximated as a sphere in a bunch of ways.
There's a really good book, for example, Scale.
It's from a physicist talking about biology.
Maybe this is also a book
I would recommend reading.
You can get a lot of really interesting
approximations and chart scaling laws of animals.
You can look at their heartbeats and
things like that, and they line up with
the size of the animal and things like that.
You can talk about an animal as a volume.
You can talk about the heat dissipation of that,
because your heat dissipation grows as the surface
area, which is growing as a square.
But your heat creation or generation
is growing as a cube.
So I just feel like physicists
have all the right cognitive tools to
approach problem solving in the world.
So because of that training, I
always try to find the first-order
terms or the second-order terms of everything.
When I'm observing a system or a thing, I have a
tangle of a web of ideas or knowledge in my mind.
I'm trying to find, what is the thing that
matters? What is the first-order component?
How can I simplify it? How can I have a
simplest thing that shows that thing, shows it in
action, and then I can tack on the other terms?
Maybe an example from one of my repos that I
think illustrates it well is called micrograd.
I don't know if you're familiar with this.
So micrograd is 100 lines of code
that shows backpropagation.
You can create neural networks
out of simple operations like plus and times, et
cetera. Lego blocks of neural networks. You build
up a computational graph and you do a forward
pass and a backward pass to get the gradients.
Now, this is at the heart of
all neural network learning.
So micrograd is a 100 lines of
pretty interpretable Python code,
and it can do forward and backward arbitrary
neural networks, but not efficiently.
So micrograd, these 100 lines of Python,
are everything you need to understand how
neural networks train. Everything else is just
efficiency. Everything else is efficiency. There's
a huge amount of work to get efficiency.
You need your tensors, you lay them out,
you stride them, you make sure
your kernels, orchestrating
memory movement correctly, et cetera.
It's all just efficiency, roughly speaking.
But the core intellectual piece of neural
network training is micrograd. It's 100 lines.
You can easily understand it. It's a recursive
application of chain rule to derive the gradient,
which allows you to optimize any
arbitrary differentiable function.
So I love finding these small-order terms and
serving them on a platter and discovering them.
I feel like education is the most intellectually
interesting thing because you have a tangle
of understanding and you're trying to lay
it out in a way that creates a ramp where
everything only depends on the thing before it.
I find that this untangling of knowledge is just
so intellectually interesting as a cognitive task.
I love doing it personally, but I just
have a fascination with trying to lay things
out in a certain way. Maybe that helps me.
It also makes the learning
experience so much more motivated.
Your tutorial on the transformer begins
with bigrams, literally a lookup table from,
"Here's the word right now, or here's
the previous word, here's the next word."
It's literally just a lookup table.
That’s the essence of it, yeah.
It’s such a brilliant way, starting with a
lookup table and then going to a transformer.
Each piece is motivated. Why would you add
that? Why would you add the next thing?
You could memorize the attention formula,
but having an understanding of why every
single piece is relevant, what problem it solves.
You're presenting the pain before you present a
solution, and how clever is that?
You want to take the student
through that progression.
There are a lot of other small
things that make it nice and engaging and
interesting. Always prompting the student.
There's a lot of small things like that are
important and a lot of good educators will do
this. How would you solve this? I'm not going to
present the solution before you guess. That would
be wasteful. That's a little bit of a…I don’t
want to swear but it’s a dick move towards you
to present you with the solution before I give
you a shot to try to come up with it yourself.
Because if you try to come up with it yourself,
you get a better understanding of what the action
space is, what the objective is, and then
why only this action fulfills that objective.
You have a chance to try it yourself, and you
have an appreciation when I give you the solution.
It maximizes the amount of
knowledge per new fact added.
Why do you think, by default, people who are
genuine experts in their field are often bad
at explaining it to somebody ramping up?
It's the curse of knowledge and expertise.
This is a real phenomenon, and I suffered
from it myself as much as I try not to.
But you take certain things for granted,
and you can't put yourself in the shoes
of new people who are just starting out.
This is pervasive and happens to me as
well. One thing that's extremely helpful.
As an example, someone was trying to show
me a paper in biology recently, and I just
instantly had so many terrible questions.
What I did was I used ChatGPT to ask the
questions with the paper in the context window.
It worked through some of the simple things.
Then I shared the thread to the person who
wrote that paper or worked on that work.
I felt like if they could see the dumb
questions I had, it might help
them explain better in the future.
For my material, I would love it if people
shared their dumb conversations with ChatGPT
about the stuff that I've created
because it really helps me put myself
again in the shoes of someone who's starting out.
Another trick that just works astoundingly well.
If somebody writes a paper or a blog post or an
announcement, it is in 100% of cases that just
the narration or the transcription of how they
would explain it to you over lunch is way more,
not only understandable, but actually
also more accurate and scientific,
in the sense that people have a bias
to explain things in the most abstract,
jargon-filled way possible and to clear
their throat for four paragraphs before
they explain the central idea.
But there's something about
communicating one-on-one with a person
which compels you to just say the thing.
Just say the thing. I saw that
tweet, I thought it was really good.
I shared it with a bunch of people.
I noticed this many, many times.
The most prominent example is that I
remember back in my PhD days doing research.
You read someone's paper, and you
work to understand what it's doing.
Then you catch them, you're having beers
at the conference later, and you ask them,
"So this paper, what were you doing? What is the
paper about?" They will just tell you these three
sentences that perfectly captured the essence
of that paper and totally give you the idea.
And you didn't have to read the paper.
It's only when you're sitting at the table
with a beer or something, and they're
like, "Oh yeah, the paper is just,
you take this idea, you take that idea and try
this experiment and you try out this thing."
They have a way of just putting it
conversationally just perfectly.
Why isn't that the abstract?
Exactly. This is coming from the
perspective of how somebody who's trying to
explain an idea should formulate it better.
What is your advice as a student to other
students, if you don't have a Karpathy
who is doing the exposition of an idea?
If you're reading a paper from somebody
or reading a book, what strategies do
you employ to learn material you're
interested in in fields you're not an expert at?
I don't know that I have unique tips and tricks,
to be honest. It's a painful process. One thing
that has always helped me quite a bit is—I
had a small tweet about this—learning things
on demand is pretty nice. Learning depth-wise.
I do feel you need a bit of alternation of
learning depth-wise, on demand—you're trying
to achieve a certain project that you're going
to get a reward from—and learning breadth-wise,
which is just, "Oh, let's do whatever 101,
and here's all the things you might need."
Which is a lot of school—does breadth-wise
learning, like, "Oh, trust me, you'll need
this later," that kind of stuff. Okay, I trust
you. I'll learn it because I guess I need it.
But I love the kind of learning
where you'll get a reward out of
doing something, and you're learning on demand.
The other thing that I've found extremely helpful.
This is an aspect where education is a bit more
selfless, but explaining things to people is a
beautiful way to learn something more deeply.
This happens to me all the time.
It probably happens to other people too because
I realize if I don't really understand something,
I can't explain it.
I'm trying and I'm like,
"Oh, I don't understand this."
It's so annoying to come to terms with that.
You can go back and make sure you understood it.
It fills these gaps of your understanding.
It forces you to come to terms
with them and to reconcile them.
I love to re-explain things and people
should be doing that more as well.
That forces you to manipulate the knowledge
and make sure that you know what you're
talking about when you're explaining it.
That's an excellent note to close on. Andrej,
that was great.
Thank you.

- The following is a conversation all
about the state-of-the-art in artificial
intelligence, including some of the
exciting technical breakthroughs and
developments in AI that happened
over the past year, and
some of the interesting things we
think might happen this upcoming
year. At times, it does
get super technical,
but we do try to make sure that
it remains accessible to folks
outside the field without
ever dumbing it down. It
is a great honor and pleasure
to be able to do this kind of
episode with two of my
favorite people in the AI
community, Sebastian Raschka and Nathan
Lambert. They are both
widely respected machine
learning researchers and engineers
who also happen to be great
communicators, educators,
writers, and X posters.
Sebastian is the author of two books
I highly recommend for beginners
and experts alike. First is
Build a Large Language Model from Scratch
and Build a Reasoning
Model from Scratch. I
truly believe in the
machine learning world, the
best way to learn and understand
something is to build it
yourself from scratch. Nathan is
the post-training lead at
the Allen Institute for AI,
author of the definitive book on
Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback.
Both of them have great X
accounts, great Substacks.
Sebastian has courses on
YouTube, Nathan has a podcast.
And everyone should absolutely
follow all of those.
those. This is the Lex Fridman
podcast. To support it, please
check out our sponsors in the
description, where you can also find
links to contact me, ask
questions, get feedback, and so
on. And now, dear friends, here's
Sebastian Raschka and Nathan Lambert.
So I think one useful lens to
look at all this through is
the so-called DeepSeek
moment. This happened about
a year ago in January 2025,
when the open-weight Chinese
company DeepSeek released
DeepSeek R1, that I
think it's fair to say surprised
everyone with near-state-of-the-art
performance, with allegedly much less
compute for much cheaper. And from then
to today, the AI competition
has gotten insane,
both on the research and product
level. It's just been accelerating.
discuss all of this today, and
maybe let's start with some spicy
questions if we can.
Who's winning at the international
level? Would you say it's the set
of companies in China or the set
of companies in the United States?
And Sebastian, Nathan,
it's good to see you guys.
guys. So Sebastian, who
do you think is winning?
- Winning is a very broad term.
I would say you mentioned the DeepSeek
moment, and I think DeepSeek is winning
the hearts of the people who work on
open-weight models because they share
these as open models. Winning,
I think, has multiple
timescales to it. We have today,
we have next year, we have in 10
years. One thing I know
for sure is that I don't
think nowadays, in 2026,
that there will be any
company that has access to
technology that no other
company has access to. That
is mainly because researchers
are frequently changing jobs and labs.
They rotate. I don't think there
will be a clear winner in terms of
technology access. However,
I do think there will be,
The differentiating factor will be
budget and hardware constraints.
I don't think the ideas
will be proprietary,
but rather the resources needed
to implement them. I don't see
currently a winner-take-all scenario.
I can't see that. At the moment.
- Nathan, what do you think?
- You see the labs put different energy
into what they're trying to do, and
I think to demarcate the point in time
when we're recording this, the hype
over Anthropic's Claude
Opus 4.5 model has been
absolutely insane, which is just...
I mean, I've used it and built stuff
in the last few weeks, and it's... it's almost
gotten to the point where it feels like a bit of
a meme in terms of the hype. And it's
kind of funny because this is very organic,
and then if we go back a few months
ago, we can see the release date and
the notes, as Gemini 3 from Google got
released, and it seemed like the
marketing and just, like, wow
factor of that release was super
high. But then at the end of November,
Claude Opus 4.5 was released and
the hype has been growing, but Gemini 3
was before this. And it kind of feels
like people don't really talk about it as much, even
though when it came out, everybody was like, this
is Gemini's moment to retake Google's
structural advantages in AI. And Gemini 3
is a fantastic model, and I still use it.
It's just kind of
differentiation is lower. And I
agree with Sebastian; what you're saying
with all these, the idea space is
very fluid, but culturally
Anthropic is known for betting very
hard on code, which is the Claude Code thing,
is working out for them right now. So I
think that even if the ideas flow
pretty freely, so much of this is
bottlenecked by human effort and the
culture of organizations, where Anthropic
seems to at least be presenting
as the least chaotic. It's a
bit of an advantage, if they can keep
doing that for a while. But on the other
side of things, there's a lot of
ominous technology from China where
there's way more labs than
DeepSeek. So DeepSeek kicked off
a movement within China, I
say kind of similar to how
ChatGPT kicked off a movement in the US
where everything had a chatbot. There's now
tons of tech companies in China that are
releasing very strong frontier open-weight
models, to the point where I would say that
DeepSeek is kind of losing its crown as the
preeminent open model maker
in China, and the likes of
Z.ai with their GLM
models, Minimax's models,
Kimi Moonshot, especially in the
last few months, has shown more
brightly. The new DeepSeek models are
still very strong, but that's kind of
a... it could look back as a big
narrative point where in 2025
DeepSeek came and it provided this
platform for way more Chinese
companies that are releasing these
fantastic models to kind of have this new
type of operation. So these models from these
Chinese companies are open-weights, and
depending on this trajectory of business
models that these American companies are
doing, they could be at risk. But
currently, a lot of people are paying
for AI software in the US, and
historically in China and other
parts of the world, people
don't pay a lot for software.
- So some of these models like DeepSeek
have the love of the people because
they are open-weight. How long do
you think the Chinese companies keep
releasing open-weight models?
- I would say for a few years. I think
that, like in the US, there's not a
clear business model for it. I have been
writing about open models for a while,
and these Chinese companies have realized
it. So I get inbound from some of them.
And they're smart and realize the same
constraints: a lot of top US tech
companies and other IT companies
won't pay for an API subscription to
Chinese companies for security
concerns. This has been a long-standing
habit in tech, and the people at
these companies then see open
weight models as an ability to influence
and take part of a huge growing
AI expenditure market in the US. And
they're very realistic about this,
and it's working for them. I think that
the government will see that that is
building a lot of influence internationally
in terms of uptake of the technology,
so there's going to be a lot of
incentives to keep it going. But building
these models and doing the research is
very expensive, so at some point, I expect
consolidation. But I don't expect that to
be a story of 2026, where there will be
more open model builders throughout
2026 than there were in 2025. And a
lot of the notable ones will be in China.
- You were going to say something?
- Yes. You mentioned DeepSeek losing its
crown. I do think to some extent, yes, but
we also have to consider though, they are
still, I would say, slightly ahead. And
the other ones—it's not that DeepSeek
got worse, it's just that the other ones
are using the ideas from DeepSeek.
For example, you mentioned Kimi—same
architecture, they're training it. And
then again, we have this leapfrogging
where they might be at some point in time a
bit better because they have the more recent
model. And I think this comes back
to the fact that there won't be
a clear winner. It will just be
like that: one person releases
something, the other one comes in, and the
most recent model is probably always the
best model.
- Yeah. We'll also see the Chinese companies
have different incentives. Like,
DeepSeek is very secretive,
whereas some of these startups are
like the MiniMaxs and Z.ais of the
world. Those two literally have filed
IPO paperwork, and they're
trying to get Western
mindshare and do a lot of outreach there. So I
don't know if these incentives will change the
model development, because DeepSeek
famously is built by a hedge fund,
Highflyer Capital, and we don't
know exactly what they use the
models for or if they care about this.
- They're secretive in terms of communication; they're
not secretive in terms of the technical reports that
describe how their models work. They're
still open on that front. And we should also
say, on the Claude Opus 4.5 hype,
there's the layer of something
being the darling of the
X echo chamber, on the
Twitter echo chamber, and the actual
amount of people that are using the
model. I think it's probably
fair to say that ChatGPT and
Gemini are focused on the
broad user base that just
want to solve problems in their
daily lives, and that user base
is gigantic. So the hype
about the coding may not be
representative of the actual use.
- I would say also a lot of
the usage patterns are,
like you said, name recognition,
brand and stuff, but also
muscle memory almost, where, you
know, ChatGPT has been around
for a long time. People just got used to
using it, and it's almost like a flywheel:
they recommend it to other users and that
stuff. One interesting point is also
the customization of LLMs.
For example, ChatGPT has a
memory feature, right? And so you
may have a subscription and you
use it for personal stuff, but I don't know
if you want to use that same thing at work.
Because it's a boundary between private and work.
If you're working at a company, they might not
allow that or you may not want that. And
I think that's also an interesting point
where you might have multiple
subscriptions. One is just clean code.
It has nothing of your
personal images or hobby
projects in there. It's just like the work thing.
And then the other one is your personal thing.
So I think that's also something where there are
two different use cases, and it doesn't mean
you only have to have one. I think
the future is also multiple ones.
- What model do you think won 2025, and what
model do you think is going to win '26?
- I think in the context of consumer chatbots,
it's a question of: are you willing to
bet on Gemini over ChatGPT?
Which I would say, in my gut,
feels like a bit of a risky bet
because OpenAI has been the incumbent, and
there are so many benefits to that in tech.
I think the
momentum, if you look at 2025, was on
Gemini's side, but they were starting from
such a low point. And RIP Bard and these
earlier attempts at getting started.
Huge credit to them for powering through the
organizational chaos to make that happen.
But also it's hard to bet against
OpenAI because they always come off as
so chaotic, but they're very good
at landing things. And I think,
personally, I have very mixed
reviews of GPT-5, but it must have
saved them so much money with the
high-line feature being a router where
most users are no longer charging
their GPU costs as much.
So I think it's very hard to dissociate
the things that I like out of models
versus the things that are going to
actually be a general
public differentiator.
- What do you think about
2026? Who's going to win?
- I'll say something, even though it's risky. I think
Gemini will continue to make progress on ChatGPT.
I think Google's scale,
when both of these are
operating at such extreme
scales—and Google has the
ability to separate research and product
a bit better, whereas you hear so much
about OpenAI being chaotic operationally
and chasing the high-impact thing,
which is a very startup culture. And then
on the software and enterprise side,
I think Anthropic will have continued success,
as they've again and again been set up for that.
And obviously Google Cloud
has a lot of offerings,
but I think this kind of Gemini name
brand is important for them to build.
Google Cloud will continue to do well, but
that's a more complex
thing to explain in the
ecosystem, because that's competing with
the likes of Azure and AWS rather than
on the model provider side.
- So in infrastructure, you think
TPU is giving an advantage?
- Largely because the margin on
NVIDIA chips is insane, and
Google can develop everything from top to
bottom to fit their stack and not have
to pay this margin. And they've
had a head start in building data
centers. So all of these things that have
both high lead times and very hard margins on
high costs, Google has a just kind
of historical advantage there.
And if there's going to be a new paradigm,
it's most likely to come from OpenAI where
their research division
again and again has shown
this ability to land a new research
idea or a product. Like Deep
Research, Sora, o1
thinking models—all these
definitional things have come from
OpenAI, and that's got to be one of their
top traits as an organization. So
it's kind of hard to bet against
that, but I think a lot of this
year will be about scale and
optimizing what could be described
as low-hanging fruit in models.
- And clearly there's a trade-off
between intelligence and
speed. This is what ChatGPT-5 was trying
to solve behind the scenes.
It's like, do people actually
want intelligence, the broad
public, or do they want speed?
- I think it's a nice variety, or
the option to have a toggle there.
I mean, for my personal usage,
most of the time when I look
something up, I use ChatGPT to ask a quick
question, get the information I wanted
fast. For most daily
tasks, I use the quick
model. Nowadays, I think the auto mode is pretty
good where you don't have to specifically
say thinking or non-thinking.
Then again, I also
sometimes want the pro mode. Very often
what I do is, when I have something
written, I put it into
ChatGPT and say, "Hey, do a
very thorough check. Are all my
references correct? Are all my thoughts
correct? Did I make any formatting
mistakes and are the figure
numbers wrong?" Or something like
that. And I don't need that right
away. I finish my stuff, maybe
have dinner, let it run, come back
and go through this. I think
this is where it's important to
have this option. I would go crazy if for
each query I would have to wait 30 minutes or
10 minutes even.
- That's me.
I'm sitting over here losing my mind that you
use the router and the non-thinking model.
I'm like, "How do you live with that?"
That's like my reaction. I've been
heavily on ChatGPT for a while.
I never touched ChatGPT-5
non-thinking. I find its tone and then
its propensity for errors—it has a higher
likelihood of errors. Some of this
is from back when OpenAI released
o3, which was the first model to
do this deep search and find many
sources and integrate them for you.
I became habituated with that. So
I will only use GPT-5.2 Thinking
or Pro when I'm finding any sort
of information query for work,
whether that's a paper or
some code reference that I
found. And I will regularly
have like five Pro
queries going simultaneously, each
looking for one specific paper or
feedback on an equation or something.
- I have a fun example where I needed
the answer as fast as possible
for this podcast before
I was going on the trip.
like a local GPU running at home
and I wanted to run a long RL
experiment. And usually I also unplug
things because you never know if
you're not at home, you don't want things
plugged in. And I accidentally unplugged the
GPU. My wife was already in the
car and it's like, "Oh dang."
Then basically I wanted as
fast as possible a Bash
script that runs my different
experiments and the evaluation. And
it's something I know, I
learned how to use the Bash
interface or Bash terminal, but
in that moment I just needed
like 10 seconds, give me the command.
- This is a hilarious situation
but yeah, so what did you use?
- So I did the non-thinking fastest
model. It gave me the Bash
command to chain different
scripts to each other and
then the thing is like you have the
tee thing where you want to route this
to a log file. Top of my head I was just
like in a hurry, I could have thought
about it myself.
- By the way I don't know if there's a
representative case, wife waiting in the car- ...
you have to run, you know, unplug the GPU. You
have to generate a Bash script. This sounds like
a movie, like- Mission Impossible.
- I use Gemini for that. So I use thinking for
all the information stuff and then Gemini for
fast things or stuff that I could sometimes
Google, which is like it's good at
explaining things and I trust that it has
this kind of background of knowledge and
it's simple. And the Gemini app
has gotten a lot better and-
It's good for those sorts of things. And
then for code and any sort of philosophical
discussion, I use Claude
Opus 4.5. Also always with
extended thinking. Extended thinking and
inference time scaling is just a way to make the
models marginally smarter.
And I will always
err on that side when the progress is very high
because you don't know when that'll unlock a new
use case. And then sometimes
use Grok for real-time
information or finding something on AI
Twitter that I knew I saw and I need
to dig up and I just
fixated on. Although when
Grok 4 came out, the Grok
4 SuperGrok Heavy, which
was like their pro variant was actually very good
and I was pretty impressed with it, and then it
just kind of like muscle memory lost
track of it with having the ChatGPT
app open. So I use many different things.
- Yeah. I actually do use Grok 4 Heavy
for debugging. For like hardcore
debugging that the other ones
can't solve, I find that it's the
best at. And... it's interesting
'cause you say ChatGPT is
the best interface. For
me, for that same reason, but
this could be just momentum-
Gemini is the better interface for me.
I think because I fell in love with
their best needle in the
haystack. If I ever put
something that has a lot of context but I'm
looking for very specific kinds of information to
make sure it tracks all of
it, I find at least that
Gemini for me has been the best. So it's
funny with some of these models,
if they win your heart over-
for one particular feature
on one particular day, for
that particular query, that
prompt, you're like, "This
model's better." And so you'll
just stick with it for a bit until
it does something really dumb. There's
like a threshold effect. Some smart
thing and then you fall in love with it and then it
does some dumb thing and you're like, "You know what?
I'm gonna switch and try Claude or
ChatGPT." And all that kind of stuff.
- This is exactly it: you use it until it
breaks, until you have a problem, and
then you change the LLM. And I think it's
the same as how we use anything,
like our favorite text editor,
operating systems, or the browser.
I mean, there are many options:
Safari, Firefox, Chrome. They're
relatively similar, but then
there are edge cases, extensions
you want, and then you switch.
But I don't think anyone types
the same thing into different
browsers and compares them. You
only do that when something breaks.
So that's a good point. You use it until
it breaks, then you explore other options.
- On the long context thing, I was
also a Gemini user, but the GPT-5.2
release blog had crazy long context
scores. People were like, "Did they
just figure out some algorithmic
change?" It went from 30% to
70% in this minor model
update. It's very hard to
keep track of all of these
things, but now I look more
favorably at GPT-5.2's long
context. So it's just like,
"How do I actually get to testing
this?" It's a never-ending battle.
- Well, it's interesting that none of
us talked about the Chinese models
from a usage perspective. What
does that say? Does it mean the
Chinese models are not as good, or are
we just very biased and US-focused?
- I think currently there's a discrepancy
between the model and the platform.
The open models are more known for the
open weights, not the platform yet.
known for the open weights,
not their platform yet.
- Many companies will sell you open-model
inference at a very low cost.
With OpenRouter, it's easy to
look at multi-model things.
You can run DeepSeek on Perplexity.
Sitting here, we're like,
"We use OpenAI GPT-5 Pro consistently."
We're all willing to pay for the marginal
intelligence gain. These
models from the US are better
in terms of the outputs.
I think the question is,
will they stay better for this
year and for years to come?
As long as they're better,
I'm gonna pay for them.
There's also analysis showing that the way
the Chinese models are served—you could
argue this is due to export controls—
is that they use fewer GPUs per
replica, which makes them slower
and have different errors. If speed and
intelligence are in your favor as a user,
in the US, a lot of users will go for
this. And I think that will spur these
Chinese companies to want
to compete in other ways,
whether it's free or substantially
lower costs, or it'll breed
creativity in terms of offerings,
which is good for the ecosystem.
But the simple thing is: the US models
are currently better, and we use them.
I tried these other open models, and
I'm like, "Fun, but I don't go back."
models, and I'm like, "Fun, but not
gonna... I don't go back to it."
- We didn't really mention
programming. That's another use case
that a lot of people deeply
care about. I use basically
half-and-half Cursor and Claude
Code, because they're... I
fundamentally different
experiences and both are useful.
What do you guys... You
program quite a bit,
so what do you use?
What's the current vibe?
- So, I use the Codeium plugin for
VS Code. You know, it's very
convenient. It's just like a plugin, and then
it's a chat interface that has access to your
repository. I know that Claude Code
is, I think, a bit different. It
is a bit more agentic. It touches more things.
It does the whole project for you. I'm not quite
there yet where I'm comfortable
with that because maybe I'm a
control freak, but I still would like
to see a bit what's going on. And
Codeium is kind of, right now, for
me, the sweet spot where it is
helping me, but it is not
taking completely over.
- I should mention, one of the reasons
I do use Claude Code is to build the
skill of programming with English. I
mean, the experience is fundamentally
different. You're... As
opposed to micromanaging the
details of the process of the
generation of the code, and
looking at the diff, which you can
in Cursor if that's the IDE you
use, and in changing, altering.
Looking and reading the code and
understanding the code deeply as you
progress, versus just thinking in
this design space and just guiding it
at this macro level, which I think
is another way of thinking
about the programming process.
Also, we should say that
Claude Code just seems to
be somehow a better utilization
of Claude Opus 4.5.
- It's a good side-by-side for people to do. You
can have Claude Code open, you can have Cursor
open, you can have VS Code open, and you
can select the same models on all of them—
...and ask questions, and it's very
interesting. Claude Code is way better
in that domain. It's remarkable.
- All right, we should say that both
of you are legit on multiple fronts:
researchers, programmers,
educators, Tweeters.
And on the book front,
too. So Nathan, at some
point soon, hopefully has
an RLHF book coming out.
- It's available for preorder, and
there's a full digital preprint. I'm
just making it pretty and better organized for
the physical thing, which is a lot of why I do
it, because it's fun to create things
that you think are excellent in the
physical form when so much
of our life is digital.
- I should say, going to Perplexity here,
Sebastian Raschka is a machine learning
researcher and author known for several
influential books. A couple of them that I
wanted to mention—which is a book
I highly recommend—Build a Large
Language Model from Scratch,
and the new one, Build a
Reasoning Model from Scratch.
So, I'm really excited about
that. Building stuff from scratch is one
of the most powerful ways of learning.
- Honestly, building an LLM from scratch is
a lot of fun. It's also a lot to learn.
And like you said, it's probably the best
way to learn how something really works,
'cause you can look at figures, but
figures can have mistakes. You can look
at concepts and explanations, but
you might misunderstand them.
But if there is code, and the code
works, you know it's correct. I mean,
there's no misunderstanding. It's precise.
Otherwise, it wouldn't work. And I
think that's the beauty behind coding.
It doesn't lie. It's math, basically. So,
even though with math, I think you can have
mistakes in a book you would never notice.
Because you are not running the math when you
are reading the book, you can't verify this.
And with code, what's nice
is you can verify it.
- Yeah, I agree with you about the Build
an LLM from Scratch book. It's nice to
tune out everything else, the internet
and so on, and just focus on the book.
But, you know, I read several
history books. It's just less
lonely somehow. It's really more
fun. Like for example, on the
programming front, I think it's genuinely
more fun to program with an LLM.
And I think it's genuinely
more fun to read with an LLM.
But you're right. That
distraction should be minimized.
So you use the LLM to basically enrich
the experience, maybe add more context.
I just find the rate of aha moments
for me is really high with LLMs.
- 100%. I also want to correct myself:
I'm not suggesting not to use
LLMs. I suggest doing it in
multiple passes. Like, one pass
just offline, focus mode, and
then after that... I mean, I also
take notes, but I, I try
to resist the urge to
immediately look things up. I do
a second pass. It's just more
structured this way. Sometimes
things are answered in the
chapter, but sometimes also it just
helps to let it sink in and think
about it. Other people have different
preferences. I highly recommend using LLMs when
reading books. For me, it's not the
first thing to do; it's the second pass.
- My recommendation is the opposite. I
like to use the LLM at the beginning
to lay out the full context of
what is this world that I'm
now stepping into? But I try
to avoid clicking out of
the LLM into the world of Twitter and
blogs, because then you're down
this rabbit hole. You're reading
somebody's opinion. There's a flame war
about a particular topic and all of a
sudden you're in the realm
of the internet and Reddit
and so on. But if you're
purely letting the
LLM give you the context of why this
matters, what are the big picture
ideas... sometimes books are good
at doing that, but not always.
- This is why I like the ChatGPT app,
because it gives the AI a home on your
computer where you can focus on it,
rather than just being another tab in
my mess of internet options.
And I think Claude Code
does a good job of making
that a joy, where it seems
very engaging as a product
design to be an interface
that your AI will then go out into
the world. It's something that is
intangible between it and
Codex; it just feels warm
and engaging, where Codex can often
be as good from OpenAI, but it just,
feel a little bit rough around
the edges. Whereas Claude Code
makes it fun to build things
from scratch, where you just
trust that it'll make something.
Obviously this is good for
websites and kind of refreshing
tooling and stuff like
this, which I use it for,
or data analysis. For my
On my blog, we scrape Hugging Face so we keep
download numbers for every dataset and model.
over time, so we have them. And Claude was
just like, "Yeah, I've made use of that
data, no problem." And I was like,
"That would've taken me days."
And then I have enough situational awareness to be
like, "Okay, these trends obviously make sense."
You can check things. But that's just a
wonderful interface where you can have an
intermediary and not have to do
the kind of awful low-level work
that you would have to do to
maintain different web projects.
- All right. So we just
talked about a bunch of the
closed-weight models. Let's talk about the
open ones. Tell me about
the landscape of open LLM
models. Which are interesting?
Which stand out to you and why? We
already mentioned DeepSeek R1.
- Do you wanna see how many we can
name off the top of our head?
- Yeah, without looking at notes.
- DeepSeek, Kimi, MiniMax, Z.ai,
Moonshot. We're just going Chinese.
- Let's throw in Mistral AI, Gemma...
...gpt-oss, the open weight
model by OpenAI. Actually,
NVIDIA had a really cool
one, Nemotron 3. There,
there's a lot of stuff especially at the
end of the year. Qwen might be the one—
- Oh, yeah. Qwen was the
obvious name I was gonna say.
You can get at least 10 Chinese
and at least 10 Western. I think
that OpenAI released
their first open model—
...since GPT-2. When I was writing about
OpenAI's open model release, they were like,
"Don't forget about GPT-2," which I thought was
really funny 'cause it's just such a
different time. But gpt-oss-120b is
actually a very strong model and
does some things that other models
don't do very well. Selfishly, I'll promote
a bunch of Western companies in the US
and Europe that have these fully open models.
I work at the Allen Institute for AI,
where we've been building OLMo, which
releases data and code. And now
we have actual competition for people
that are trying to release everything
so that others can train these models.
There's the Institute for Foundation
Models/LM360, which has had their K2
models of various types.
Apertus is a Swiss research
consortium. Hugging Face has SmolLM, which
is very popular. And NVIDIA's Nemotron
3 has started releasing data as
well. And then Stanford's Martini
Community Project, which is kind
of making it so there's a pipeline for people
to open a GitHub issue and implement a new
idea and then have it run in a
stable language modeling stack.
This space, that list
was way smaller in 2024—
...so I think it was just AI2. So it's
a great thing for more people to get
involved and to understand language
models, which doesn't really have a
Chinese analog. While I'm talking, I'll
say that the Chinese open
language models tend to be
much bigger, and that gives them higher
peak performance as MoEs, where a lot of
these things that we like a
lot, whether it was Gemma and
Nemotron, have tended to be smaller
models from the US, which is starting
to change from the US and Europe.
Mistral Large 3 came out, which was a
giant MoE model, very similar
to DeepSeek architecture in
December. And then a startup, RCAI, and
both Nemotron and NVIDIA have teased MoE
models way bigger than
100 billion parameters-
like this 400 billion parameter
range coming in this Q1
2026 timeline. So I think this
kind of balance is set to change
this year in terms of what people are
using the Chinese versus US open models
for, which I'm personally going
to be very excited to watch.
- First of all, huge props for
being able to name so many of
these. Did you actually name LLaMA?
- No.
- I feel like ...
- RIP.
- This was not on purpose.
- RIP LLaMA.
All right. Can you mention some interesting
models that stand out? You mentioned
Qwen 3 is obviously a standout.
- So I would say the year's almost
bookended by both DeepSeek
V3 and R1. And then on the other
hand, in December, DeepSeek-V3.2.
Because what I like about those is
they always have an interesting
architecture tweak
that others don't have. But
otherwise, if you want to go with the
familiar but really good
performance, Qwen 3 and, like
Nathan said, also gpt-oss-120b.
And I think what's
interesting about it is it's kind
of like the first public or open
weight model that was really trained
with tool use in mind, which
I do think is kind of a paradigm shift
where the ecosystem was not quite
ready for it. By tool use, I mean
that the LLM is able to do a web
search or to call a Python interpreter.
And I do think it's a
standout because it's a huge
unlock. Because one of the
most common complaints
about LLMs are, for example,
hallucinations, right?
And so, in my opinion, one of the best
ways to solve hallucinations is to
not try to always remember
information or make things up.
For math, why not use a
calculator app or Python?
If I ask the LLM, "Who won
the soccer World Cup in
1998?" instead of just trying
to memorize, it could go
do a search. I think mostly
it's still a Google search.
So ChatGPT and gpt-oss-120b,
they would do a tool call to
Google, maybe find the FIFA
website. Find, okay, it was
France. It would get you that information
reliably instead of just trying to
memorize it. So I think it's
a huge unlock which right now
is not fully utilized yet by
the open-source, open-weight
ecosystem. A lot of people
don't use tool call modes
because I think, first, it's a trust thing.
You don't want to run this on your computer
where it has access to tools, could wipe your
hard drive or whatever. So you want to maybe
containerize that. But
I do think that is like
a really important step for the
upcoming years to have this ability.
- So a few quick things.
First of all, thank you
for defining what you mean by tool use. I
think that's a great thing to do in general
for the concepts we're talking
about. Even things as sort of
well-established as MoEs.
You have to say that means mixture
of experts, and you kind of
have to build up an intuition for people what
that means, how it's actually utilized, what
are the different flavors. So what
does it mean that there's just such an
explosion of open models?
What's your intuition?
- If you're releasing an open model, you want people
to use it, is the first and foremost thing.
And then after that comes things like
transparency and trust. I think when
you look at China, the biggest reason
is that they want people around the
world to use these models, and I think a
lot of people will not. If you look outside
of the US, a lot of people will not pay for software, but they
might have computing resources where you can put a model on
it and run it. I think there can also be
data that you don't want to send to the
cloud. So the number one thing is
getting people to use models, use
AI, or use your AI that might not be
able to do it without having access
to the model.
- I guess we should state explicitly, so we've
been talking about these Chinese models
and open weight models.
Oftentimes, the way they're run is
locally. So it's not like you're sending
your data to China or to whoever developed
Silicon Valley, or whoever
developed the model.
- A lot of American startups
make money by hosting-
...these models from China and
selling them. It's called selling
tokens, which means somebody will call
the model to do some piece of work.
I think the other reason is for US
companies like OpenAI. They are so GPU
deprived. They're at the limits of the
GPUs. Whenever they make a release,
they're always talking about
like, "Our GPUs are hurting." And
I think during one of these
gpt-oss-120b release sessions, Sam
Altman said, "Oh, we're releasing this because
we can use your GPUs. We don't have to
use our GPUs, and OpenAI can
still get distribution out
of this," which is another very real thing,
because it doesn't cost them anything.
- And for the user, I think also,
there are users who just use the
model locally how they would use ChatGPT.
But also for companies I think it's a huge
unlock to have these models because you can
customize them, you can train them, you
can add post-training,
add more data. Like,
specialize them into, let's say,
law, medical models, whatever you
have. And the appeal, you mentioned
Llama, the appeal of the open-weight
models from China is that the
open-weight models' licenses
are even friendlier. I think they are
just unrestricted open source licenses
where if we use something like Llama
or Gemma, there are some strings
attached. I think it's like an upper limit in
terms of how many users you have. And then if
you exceed, I don't know, so and so many
million users, you have to report your
financial situation to, let's
say, Meta or something like that.
And I think while it is a
free model, there are strings
attached, and people do like things
where strings are not attached. So
I think that's also one of the
reasons, besides performance, why the
open-weight models from China are so
popular, because you can just use them.
There's no catch in that sense.
- The ecosystem has gotten better on that
front, but mostly downstream of these new
providers providing such open licenses. That was
funny when you pulled up Perplexity and said,
"Kimi K2 Thinking hosted in the US." Which is
just like an exact... I've never seen this, but
it's an exact example of what we're talking
about where people are sensitive to this.
But Kimi K2 Thinking and Kimi K2 is
a model that is very popular. People
say that has very good creative writing
and also in doing some software
things. So it's just these little quirks that
people pick up on with different models that they
like.
- What are some interesting ideas
that some of these models have
explored that you can speak to, that
are particularly interesting to you?
- Maybe we can go chronologically. I mean,
there was, of course, DeepSeek. DeepSeek
R1 that came out in January of 2025,
if we just focus on 2025. However,
this was based on DeepSeek-V3,
which came out the year before
in December 2024. There are
multiple things on the architecture
side. What is fascinating is...
I mean, that's what I do with my
from-scratch coding projects. You can
still start with GPT-2, and you can
add things to that model to make it
into this other model. So it's all
still kind of like the same
lineage. It is a very close
relationship between those. But
top of my head, DeepSeek—what was
unique there is the Mixture of Experts.
Not that they were inventing Mixture of
Experts—we can maybe talk a bit
more about what Mixture of Experts
means—but just to list these
things first before we
dive into detail. Mixture of Experts,
but then they also had Multi-head
Latent Attention, which is a tweak
to the attention mechanism, where
this was, I would say,
the main distinguishing
factor between these
open-weight models. Different
tweaks to make inference or KV
cache size... We can also define
KV cache in a few moments,
but to kind of make it more
economical to have long context, to
shrink the KV cache size. So what are
tweaks that we can do? And most of them
focused on the attention mechanism. There
is Multi-head Latent Attention
in DeepSeek. There is Group
Query Attention, which is still very popular.
It's not invented by any of those models.
It goes back a few years. But
that would be the other option.
Sliding window attention—I think
OLMo 3 uses it, if I remember
correctly. So there are these
different tweaks that make the models
different. Otherwise, I put
them all together in an
article once where I just
compared them. They are very,
surprisingly similar. It's just different
numbers in terms of how many repetitions
of the transformer block you
have in the center. And, like,
just little knobs that people tune.
But what's so nice about it is
it works no matter what. You can
tweak things. You can move the
normalization layers around to get some
performance gains. And OLMo is always very
good in ablation studies,
showing what it actually
does to the model if you move something around.
Ablation studies: does it make it better or
worse? But there are so many, let's say, ways you
can implement a transformer and make it still
work. The big ideas that are
still prevalent is Mixture of
Experts, multi-head latent attention,
sliding window attention, group
query attention. And then at the
end of the year, we saw a focus
on making the attention mechanism
scale linearly with inference token
prediction. So there was
Qwen2-VL, for example,
which added a gated delta
net. It's kind of inspired by
State space models, where you have a fixed
state that you keep updating. But it
makes essentially this attention
cheaper, or it replaces attention
with a cheaper operation.
- And it may be useful to step
back and talk about transformer
architecture in general.
- Yeah, so maybe we should start
with the GPT-2 architecture. The
transformer that was derived from the
"Attention Is All You Need" paper.
The "Attention Is All You Need" paper had
a transformer architecture that had two
parts, an encoder and a
decoder. And GPT went
just focusing in on the decoder
part. It is essentially still a
neural network and it has
this attention mechanism
inside. And you predict
one token at a time. You
pass it through an embedding layer. There's
the transformer block. The transformer block
has attention modules and a fully
connected layer. And there are some
normalization layers in between. But it's essentially
neural network layers with this attention
mechanism. So coming from
GPT-2 when we move on
to gpt-oss-120b, there is, for
example, the Mixture of Experts
layer. It's not invented by
gpt-oss-120b. It's a few years old.
But it is essentially a tweak to make
the model larger without consuming more
compute in each forward pass. So
there is this fully connected layer,
and if listeners are
familiar with multi-layer
perceptrons, you can think of a
mini multi-layer perceptron, a
fully connected neural network layer
inside the transformer. And it's very
expensive, because it's fully connected. If you
have a thousand inputs and a thousand outputs,
that's like one million connections.
And it's a very expensive part in
this transformer. And the idea
is to kind of expand that
into multiple feedforward
networks. So instead of having
one, let's say you have 256, but it
would make it way more expensive,
because now you have 256, but you don't
use all of them at the same time. So you
now have a router that says, "Okay,
based on this input token, it would be
useful to use this fully
connected network." And in that
context, it's called an expert. So a
Mixture of Experts means you have multiple
experts. And depending on what
your input is, let's say it's more
math-heavy, it would use different
experts, compared to, let's say,
translating input text from English to
Spanish. It would maybe consult different
experts. It's not quite clear, I mean,
not as clear-cut to say, "Okay, this
is only an expert for math and
for Spanish." It's a bit more
fuzzy. But the idea is
essentially that you pack more
knowledge into the network, but not all
the knowledge is used all the time.
That would be very wasteful.
So, during the token
generation, you are more selective.
There's a router that selects which
tokens should go to which expert.
It adds more complexity. It's
harder to train. There's a lot that
can go wrong, like collapse and
everything. So I think that's why OLMo
3 still uses dense... I mean, you
have OLMo models with Mixture of
Experts, but dense models, where dense
means... So also, it's
jargon. There's a distinction
between dense and sparse. So Mixture
of Experts is considered sparse,
because we have a lot of experts, but only
a few of them are active. So that's called
sparse. And then dense would be the
opposite, where you only have one fully
connected module, and
it's always utilized.
- So maybe this is a good place
to also talk about KV cache.
But actually, before that,
even zooming out, like
fundamentally, how many new ideas have
been implemented from GPT-2 to today?
Like, how different really
are these architectures?
- Take the Mixture of Experts.
The attention mechanism in
gpt-oss-120b, that would be the Group
Query Attention mechanism. So it's a
slight tweak from Multi-Head Attention to
Group Query Attention. So that we have
too... I think they replaced LayerNorm by
RMSNorm, but it's just like a different
normalization there and not a big change.
It's just like a tweak. The
nonlinear activation function—
people familiar with deep neural
networks, I mean, it's the same as
changing sigmoid with ReLU. It's not
changing the network fundamentally.
It's just a little tweak.
And that's about it, I
would say. It's not really fundamentally
that different. It's still the same
architecture. So you can go from
one into the other by just
adding these changes basically.
- It fundamentally is still
the same architecture.
- Yep. For example, you mentioned my book
earlier. That's a GPT-2 model in the
book because it's simple
and it's very small, so 124
million parameters approximately. But
in the bonus materials, I do have
OLMo from scratch, Gemini 3 from
scratch, and other types of from-scratch
models. And I always start it with my
GPT-2 model and just tweak the—well,
add different components and you get
from one to the other. It's kind of like
a lineage in a sense.
- Can you build up an intuition for
people? Because when you zoom out,
you look at it, there's so much
rapid advancement in the AI world.
And at the same time, fundamentally
the architectures have not changed.
So where is all the turbulence, the
turmoil of the advancement happening?
Where are the gains to be had?
- So there are different stages where
you develop the network or train the
network. You have the pre-training.
Now back in the day, it was just
pre-training with GPT-2. Now you
have pre-training, mid-training, and
post-training. So I think
right now we are in the
post-training focus stage.
Pre-training still gives you
advantages if you scale it up with
better, higher quality data. But then
we have capability unlocks that
were not there with GPT-2, for
For example, ChatGPT is basically a GPT-3
model. And GPT-3 is the same as
GPT-2 in terms of architecture.
What was new was adding
supervised fine-tuning and
reinforcement learning with human feedback.
So it's more on the algorithmic side than the
architecture.
- I would say that the systems also change a
lot. If you listen to NVIDIA's announcements,
they talk about things like, "You
now do FP8, you can now do FP4."
What's happening is these labs are figuring
out how to utilize more compute to put
it into one model, which lets
them train faster and put more
data in. And then you can find better
configurations faster by doing
this. So you can look at, essentially,
tokens per second per GPU
as a metric that you look at when
you're doing large-scale training.
You can go from 10k to 13k
by turning on FP8 training,
which means you're using less
memory per parameter in the
model. By saving less information,
you do less communication and train
faster. So all of these
system things underpin way
faster experimentation
on data and algorithms.
It's a loop that keeps going where it's hard to
describe when you look at architectures and they're
exactly the same, but the code base used
to train these models is vastly different-
-and you could probably... the GPUs
are different but you probably
train gpt-oss-20b way faster in wall-clock
time than GPT-2 was trained at the time.
- Yeah. Like you said, they had, for
example, in Mixture of Experts this
FP4 optimization where you
get more throughput. But I do
think, for speed this is true, but it
doesn't give the model new capabilities.
It's just: how much can we
make the computation coarser
without suffering in terms
of model performance degradation?
But I do think- I mean,
there are alternatives popping up to
the transformer. Text diffusion models,
a completely different paradigm. And
there is also... I mean, although
text diffusion models might use
transformer architectures, it's not an
autoregressive transformer.
And also Mamba models.
It's a state space model. But
they do have trade-offs, and
nothing has yet replaced
the autoregressive
transformer as the state-of-the-art model.
For state-of-the-art, you would still
go with that, but there are now
alternatives for the cheaper
end—alternatives that are kind of making
compromises. It's not just one
architecture anymore. There are
little ones coming up. But if we talk about
the state-of-the-art, it's pretty much still
the transformer architecture, autoregressive,
derived from GPT-2 essentially.
- I guess the big question here is, we talked
quite a bit about the architecture behind
the pre-training. Are the scaling laws
holding strong across pre-training,
post-training, inference, context
size, data, and synthetic data?
- I'd like to start with the technical
definition of a scaling law-
-which informs all of this. The scaling
law is the power law relationship
between... You can think of the x-axis,
so kind of what you are scaling as a
combination of compute and data,
which are kind of similar,
and then the y-axis is like the held-out
prediction accuracy over next tokens.
We talked about models being autoregressive.
It's like if you keep a set of
text that the model has not seen, how
accurate will it get when you train? And
the idea of scaling laws came
when people figured out that that
was a very predictable
relationship. And I think that
that technical term is continuing,
and then the question is, what
do users get out of it? Then there
are more types of scaling where,
OpenAI's o1 was famous for introducing
inference time scaling. And I think
less famously for also showing that you
can scale reinforcement learning training
and get kind of this log x-axis and then a
linear increase in performance on y-axis.
So there's kind of these three axes now
where the traditional scaling laws are talked
about for pre-training, which is how big
your model is and how big your dataset is,
and then scaling reinforcement learning,
which is like how long can you do this trial
and error learning that we'll talk about.
We'll define more of this, and then this
inference time compute, which is just letting the
model generate more tokens on a specific
problem. So I'm kind of bullish,
but they're all really still working, but
the low-hanging fruit has mostly been taken,
especially in the last year on reinforcement
learning with verifiable rewards,
which is this RLVR, and then
inference time scaling,
which is just why these models feel
so different to use, where previously
you would get that first token immediately.
And now they'll go off for seconds,
minutes, or even hours,
generating these hidden thoughts
before giving you the first word of
your answer. And that's all about this
inference time scaling, which is
such a wonderful kind of step function in
terms of how the models change abilities.
They kind of enabled this tool use
stuff and enabled this much better
software engineering that we
were talking about. And this,
when we say enabled, is almost entirely
downstream of the fact that this
reinforcement learning with verifiable
rewards training just kind of let the models
pick up these skills very
easily. So let the models learn,
so if you look at the reasoning
process when the models are generating
a lot of tokens, what it'll often be doing is:
it tries a tool, it looks at what it gets back.
It tries another API, it sees what it
gets back and if it solves the problem.
So the models, when you're training
them, very quickly learn to do this.
And then at the end of the day, that
gives this kind of general foundation
where the model can use CLI
commands very nicely in your repo
and handle Git for you and move
things around and organize things
or search to find more information, which if
we were sitting in these chairs a year ago
is something that we didn't really think
of the models doing. So this is just
kind of something that has happened this
year and has totally transformed how
has totally transformed how
we think of using AI which
evolution and just unlocks so
much value. But it's like,
just so- pr- unlocks so much
value. But it's- it's like,
it's not clear what the next avenue will
be in terms of unlocking stuff like this.
I think there's... we'll get to continual
learning later, but there's a lot of buzz
around certain areas of AI, but no
one knows when the next step function
will really come.
- So you've actually said
quite a lot of things there,
and said profound things
quickly. It would be nice to
unpack them a little bit. You say you're
bullish basically on every version of
scaling. So can we just even start
at the beginning? Pre-training,
are we kind of implying that the
low- hanging fruit on pre-training
scaling has been picked? Has pre-training
hit a plateau, or is even pre-training
still something you're bullish on?
- Pre-training has gotten extremely
expensive. I think to scale up
pre-training, it's also implying
that you're gonna serve a very
large model to the users.
So I think that it's been
loosely established the likes of GPT-4
and similar models were around one
trillion parameters at the biggest size.
There's a lot of rumors that they've
actually gotten smaller as training has
gotten more efficient. You want to make
the model smaller because then your costs
of serving go down proportionately.
These models, the cost of training
them is really low relative to the
cost of serving them to hundreds of millions of
users. I think DeepSeek had this famous number
of about five million dollars for
pre-training at cloud market rates.
In OLMo 3, section 2.4
in the paper, we just
detailed how long we had the GPU clusters
sitting around for training which
includes engineering
issues, multiple seeds,
and it was like about two million dollars to rent
the cluster to deal with all the headaches of
training a model. So
these models are pretty—
like, a lot of people could get one to
10 million dollars to train a model,
but the recurring costs of
serving millions of users is
really billions of dollars of compute.
I think that you can look at a
thousand GPU rental you can pay
100 grand a day for. And these
companies could have millions of GPUs.
Like you can look at how much these things
cost to sit around. So
that's kind of a big
thing, and then it's like, if scaling
is actually giving you a better model,
is it gonna be financially worth it?
And I think we'll slowly push it
out as AI solves more compelling tasks,
so like the likes of Claude Opus 4.5,
making Claude Code just
work for things. I—
I launched this project called the
ATOM project, which is American Truly
Open Models in July, and
that was like a true vibe
coded website, and like,
I have a job to make
plots and stuff. And then I came back to
refresh it in the last few weeks and it's like
Claude Opus 4.5 versus whatever model at
the time was like, just crushed all the
issues that it had from building in
June and July and like, it might be a
bigger model. There's a lot of things that go
into this, but there's still progress coming.
- So what you're speaking to is the
nuance of the y-axis of the scaling
laws—the way it's experienced
versus on a benchmark, the
actual intelligence might be
different. But still, your intuition
about pre-training, if you
scale the size of compute,
will the models get better? Not
whether it's financially viable but
just from the law aspect of it, do you
think the models will get smarter?
- Yeah. And I think that there's...
And this sometimes comes off as
almost like disillusionment
from people, leadership at AI
companies saying this, but they're like,
"It's held for 13 orders of magnitude
of compute, why would it ever
end?" So I think fundamentally it
is pretty unlikely to stop, it's just
eventually we're not even gonna be able to
test the bigger scales because of all the
problems that come with more compute.
I think that there's a
lot of talk on how 2026
is a year when very large
Blackwell compute clusters,
like gigawatt-scale facilities at
hyperscalers, are coming online.
These were all contracts for
power and data centers that
were signed and sought
out in 2022 and 2023.
So before or right after ChatGPT.
It took this two-to-three-year
lead time to build these bigger clusters to
train the models. While there's obviously
immense interest in building even more data
centers than that. So that is the crux
that people are saying: these new clusters
are coming. The labs are gonna have
more compute for training.
They're going to utilize this,
but it's not a given. I've seen so
much progress that I expect it,
and I expect a little bit
bigger models, and I expect...
I would say it's more like we'll see a
$2,000 subscription this year. We've seen
$200 subscriptions. That could 10X again,
and these are the kind of things that
could come, and they're all
downstream of this bigger model
that offers just a little
bit more cutting edge.
- So, you know, it's reported that xAI
is gonna hit that one-gigawatt scale
early '26, and a
full two gigawatts by year end. How
do you think they'll utilize that
in the context of scaling laws?
Is a lot of that inference?
Is a lot of that training?
- It ends up being all of
the above. So I think
that all of your decisions when
you're training a model come back to
pre-training. So if you're going to
scale RL on a model, you still need to
decide on your architecture that enables
this. We were talking about other
architectures and using different types of
attention, or a mixture of experts models.
The sparse nature of MoE models makes it
much more efficient to do
generation, which becomes a big part
of post-training, and you need to
have your architecture ready so
that you can actually scale up this
compute. I still think most of the
compute is going in at pre-training.
Because you can still make a model
better, you still want to go and revisit
this. You still want the best base model
you can. And in a few years that'll
saturate and the RL compute will just
go longer.
- Are there people who disagree with
you and say pre-training is dead?
It's all about scaling inference,
scaling post-training,
scaling context, continual learning,
scaling data, synthetic data?
- People vibe that way and describe it in
that way, but I think it's not the practice
that is happening.
- It's just the general vibe of
people saying this thing is dead-
- The excitement is elsewhere.
So the low-hanging fruit-
...in RL is elsewhere. For example,
we released our model in November...
Every company has deadlines. Our
deadline was November 20th, and
for that, our run was five
days, which compared to 2024
is a very long time to just be doing
post- training at a model of 30 billion
parameters. It's not a big model. And
then in December, we had another release,
where we let the RL run for
another three and a half weeks,
and the model got notably better,
so we released it. And that's a
to just allocate to something
that is going to be your peak-
...for the year. So it's like-
- The reasoning is-
- There's these types of decisions when
training a model where they just...
They can't leave it forever.
You have to keep pulling
in the improvements from
researchers. So you redo
pre-training, you'll do this
post-training for a month, but then you
need to give it to your users. You
need to do safety testing. So it's
just... I think there's a lot in
place that reinforces this cycle of
updating the models. Things improve.
You get a new compute cluster
that lets you do something more
stably or faster. It's like
you hear a lot about Blackwell
having rollout issues, where at
AI2, most of the models we're
pre-training are on 1,000 to 2,000
GPUs. But when pre-training on
10,000 or 100,000 GPUs, you hit
very different failures. GPUs break
in weird ways, and on a 100,000
GPU run, you're pretty much
guaranteed to have one GPU
that is down. Your training code must
handle that redundancy, which is a
very different problem.
Whereas what we're doing, like playing
with post-training on a cluster,
or for people learning ML,
what they're battling to
train these biggest models is just-
...mass distributed scale,
and it's very different.
But that's somewhat different
than- That's a systems problem-
...in order to enable scaling
laws, especially at pre-training.
You need all these GPUs at once.
When we shift to RL, it actually
lends itself to heterogeneous compute
because you have many copies of the
model. To do a primer for
language model reinforcement learning,
what you're doing is having two sets of
GPUs. One you can call the actor,
and one you call the learner.
The learner is where your actual
reinforcement learning updates happen.
These are traditionally
policy gradient algorithms.
Proximal Policy Optimization,
PPO, and Group Relative Policy
Optimization, GRPO, are
the two popular classes.
And on the other side you have
actors which are generating
completions, and these completions
are what you're going to grade.
Reinforcement learning is all about
optimizing reward. In practice,
you can have a lot of different actors
in different parts of the world
doing different types of problems,
and then you send it back to
this highly networked compute
cluster to do this actual learning
where you take the gradients.
You need to have a
tightly meshed network to do
different types of parallelism and
spread out your model for efficient
training. Every different type of
training and serving has these
considerations to scale.
We talked about pre-training and RL,
and then inference time scaling-
how do you serve a model that's thinking
for an hour to 100 million users?
I don't know about that, but I know
that's a hard problem. In order
to give people this intelligence, there's
all these systems problems, and we need
more compute and you need more
stable compute to do it."
- But you're bullish on all of these kinds
of scaling is what I'm hearing. On the
inference, on the reasoning,
even on the pre-training?
- Yeah, so that's a big can of worms
here, but there are basically two...
The knobs are the training and the
inference scaling where you can
get gains. In a world where
we had, let's say, infinite
compute resources, you want to do all of them.
So you have training, you have inference
scaling, and training is like a hierarchy:
it's pre-training, mid-training,
post-training. Changing the model size,
more training data, training a bigger
model gives you more knowledge in the
model. Then the model, let's say, has a
better base model. Back in the day,
or still, we call it a foundation
model, and it unlocks... But
you don't, let's say, have
the model be able to solve
your most complex tasks
during pre-training or after pre-training.
You still have these other unlock
phases where you have mid-training
or, for example, post-training with
RL that unlocks capabilities that the model
has in terms of knowledge in the pre-training.
And I think, sure, if you
do more pre-training, you get a
better base model that you can unlock
later. But like Nathan said, it just becomes
too expensive. We don't have infinite compute,
so you have to decide, do I want to spend
that compute more on making the model
larger? It's like a trade-off. In
an ideal world, you want to do
all of them. And I think in that sense,
scaling is still pretty much alive. You would
still get a better model, but like we saw
with Claude Opus 4.5, it's just not worth it.
Because you can unlock more
performance with other techniques at
that current moment, especially if you
look at inference scaling. That's one
of the biggest gains this year with o1,
where it took a smaller model further than
pre-training a larger model like
Claude Opus 4.5. So I wouldn't say
pre-training scaling is dead, it's just that
there are other more attractive ways to scale
right now. But at some point,
you will still want to make some
progress on the pre-training.
The thing also to consider
is where you want to spend your
money. If you spend it more
on the pre-training, it's like a fixed cost.
You train the model, and then it has this
capability forever. You can always use it.
With inference scaling, you don't spend
money during training, you spend money
later per query, and then it's also like
math. How long is my model gonna be
on the market if I replace it in
half a year? Maybe it's not worth
spending $5 million, $10 million,
$100 million on training
it longer. Maybe I will just do more
inference scaling and get performance there.
It maybe costs me $2 million in terms
of user queries. It becomes a question
of how many users you have and doing the
math, and I think that's also where
it's interesting where ChatGPT is in a
position. I think they have a lot of users where
they need to go a bit cheaper, where they have that
GPT-5 model that is a bit
smaller. Other companies that
have... Let's say, if
your customers have other
trade-offs. For example, there was
also the Math Olympiad or some
of these math problems where
ChatGPT or they had a proprietary
model, and I'm pretty sure it's just
like a model that has been fine-tuned
a little bit more, but most of it
was during inference scaling to achieve
peak performance in certain tasks.
need that all the time. But
yeah, long story short, I do
think all of these pre-training,
mid-training, post-training,
inference scaling, they are all still
things you want to do. It's just
finding—at the moment, in this year, it's
finding the right ratio that gives you the best
bang for the buck, basically.
- I think this might be a good place to
define pre-training, mid-training, and
post-training.
- So, pre-training is the classic training
one next token prediction at a time.
You have a big corpus of data. And Nathan
probably also has very interesting
insights there because of OLMo 3. A big
portion of the paper focuses on the
right data mix. So, pre-training is
essentially just, you know, training
cross entropy loss, training
on next token prediction on a
vast corpus of internet data,
books, papers and so forth. It
has changed a little bit over the years
in the sense people used to throw in
everything they can. Now,
it's not just raw data. It's
also synthetic data
where people, let's say,
rephrase certain things. So synthetic
data doesn't necessarily mean
purely AI-made data. It's also taking
something from an article, a Wikipedia
article, and then rephrasing it as
a Q&A question or summarizing it, rewording
it, and making better data that way.
Because I think of it also
like with humans. If someone,
let's say, reads a book compared to a
messy—no offense, but like—Reddit post
or something like that,
I do think you learn—
- There's going to be a post
about this, Sebastian.
- Some Reddit data is very coveted
and excellent for training.
You just have to filter it.
- And I think that's the idea.
I think it's like if someone
took that and rephrased it in a, let's
say, more concise and structured way,
I think it's higher quality data
that gets the LLM there faster.
You get the same LLM out of it at the
end, but it trains faster because
if the grammar and the punctuation are
correct, it already learns the
correct way, versus getting
information from a messy source and then
learning later how to correct that.
So, I think that is how pre-training
evolved and why scaling still works.
It's not just about the
amount of data, it's also
the tricks to make that data
better for you, in a sense. And
then mid-training is... I mean, it
used to be called pre-training.
I think it's called mid-training because it was awkward
to have pre-training and post-training but nothing in the
middle, right? It sounds a bit weird. You have pre-training
and post-training, but what's the actual training?
So, the mid-training is usually
similar to pre-training,
but it's a bit more
specialized. It's the same
algorithm, but what you do is
you focus, for example, on
long-context documents. The reason you
don't do that during pre-training is
because you don't have that many long
context documents. We have a specific
phase. And one problem of LLMs is
still that it's a neural network.
It has the problem of catastrophic
forgetting. So, you teach it something,
it forgets other things. And you
wanna... I mean, it's not 100% forgetting,
but it's like "no free lunch."
It's the same with humans. If you
ask me some math I learned 10 years
ago, I would have to look at it again.
- Nathan was actually saying that he's consuming
so much content that there's a catastrophic
forgetting issue.
- Yeah, I'm trying to learn so much about
AI, and it's like I was learning about
pre-training parallelism. I'm like, "I lost
something and I don't know what it was."
- I don't want to anthropomorphize
LLMs, but it's the same kind of thing
in how humans learn. I mean,
quantity is not always better
because you have to be selective.
And mid-training is being
selective in terms of quality content
at the end. So the last thing the
LLM has seen is the quality stuff.
And then post-training is all
the fine-tuning, supervised fine-tuning,
DPO, Reinforcement Learning
with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR),
with human feedback, and so forth. So
the refinement stages. And it's also
interesting, it's a cost thing. You spend
a lot of money on pre-training right now.
RL a bit less. With RL, you don't really
teach it knowledge. It's more like unlocking
the knowledge; it's more like a skill
learning, like how to solve problems with
the knowledge that it has from pre-training.
There are actually three papers
this year, or last year, 2025,
on RL for pre-training. But I don't
think anyone does that in production.
- Toy examples for now.
- Toy examples, right? But to generalize,
RL post-training is more like
the skill unlock, where pre-training
is like soaking up the knowledge.
- A few things that could be
helpful. A lot of people
think of synthetic data as being bad
for training the models. You mentioned
how DeepSeek got almost...
OCR, which is Optical Character
Recognition. A lot of labs did it.
Ai2 had one, Meta had multiple.
And the reason each of these labs
has these is because there are vast
amounts of PDFs and other digital documents
on the web that aren't in formats
that are encoded with text easily.
So you use these Almost-OCR,
DeepSeek OCR, or what we called our
Almost-OCR, to extract trillions of
tokens of candidate data for pre-training.
Pre-training dataset size is
measured in trillions of tokens.
Smaller models from researchers can be
something like five to 10 trillion.
researchers can be something
like five to 10 trillion. Um,
Qwen is documented going up to 50 trillion,
and there are rumors that these closed
labs can go to 100 trillion tokens.
Getting this potential data to put
in—they have a very big funnel, and
the data you actually train on is
a small percentage of this.
This character recognition data
would be described as synthetic data for
pre-training in a lab. And then there's
also the fact that ChatGPT now
gives wonderful answers, and you
can train on those best answers, and that's
synthetic data. It's very different than
early ChatGPT with lots
of hallucination data.
when people became grounded
in synthetic data.
- One interesting question is, if I recall
correctly, OLMo 3 was trained with less
data than specifically some other
open-weight models, maybe even
OLMo 2. But you still got better performance,
and that might be one example of how
the data helped.
- It's mostly down to data quality.
I think if we had more compute, we would
train for longer. I think we'd ultimately see
that as something we would want
to do. And especially with big
models, you need more compute, because we
talked about having more parameters and
we talked about knowledge. Essentially,
there's a ratio where big models can absorb
more from data, and then you
get more benefit out of this.
Any logarithmic graph in your mind
is like a small model will level off
sooner if you're measuring tons
of tokens, and bigger models need
more. But mostly, we aren't training
that big of models right now at
AI2, and getting the highest quality data
we can is the natural starting point.
- Is there something to be said about the
topic of data quality? Is there some
low-hanging fruit there still where
the quality could be improved?
- It's like turning the crank.
Historically, in the open, there's been a
canonical best pre-training
dataset that has
moved around between who has the most
recent one or the best recent effort. Like
AI2's Dolma was very early with the
first OLMo, and Hugging Face had
FineWeb. And there's a DCLM project,
which has been kind of like a,
which stands for Data Comp Language
Model. There's been Data Comp
for other machine learning projects,
and they had a very strong
dataset. And a lot of it is
the internet is becoming
fairly closed off, so we have Common Crawl,
which is hundreds of trillions of tokens,
and you filter it. It looks
like scientific work where
you're training classifiers and
making decisions based on how you
prune down this dataset into the
highest quality stuff and the stuff
that suits your tasks. Previously,
language models were tested a lot more
on knowledge and conversational
things, but now they're expected
to do math and code. To train a reasoning
model, you need to remix your whole
dataset. And there's a lot of wonderful
scientific methods here where you can,
you can take your gigantic dataset,
sample really tiny things from
different sources, such as
GitHub, Stack Exchange, Reddit,
Wikipedia. You can sample small things from
them, and train small models on each of these
mixes and measure their performance on your
evaluations. You can just do basic linear
regression, and it's like, "Here's your optimal
dataset." But if your evaluations change, your
dataset changes a lot. So a lot
of OLMo 3 was new sources for
reasoning to be better at math and
code, and then you do this mixing
procedure and it gives you the answer.
I think that's happened at labs this
year; there's new hot things, whether
it's coding environments or web
navigation, and you need to bring in new data,
change your whole pre-training so that your
post-training can work better.
And that's like the constant
evolution and the redetermining of
what they care about for their models.
- Are there fun anecdotes of
what sources of data are
particularly high quality that we
wouldn't expect? You mentioned Reddit
sometimes can be a source.
- Reddit was very useful. I
think PDFs is definitely one.
- Oh, especially arXiv.
- Yeah, so AI2 has run Semantic
Scholar for a long time, which is
what you can say is a competitor to
Google Scholar with a lot more features.
And to do this, AI2 has found
and scraped a lot of PDFs for
openly accessible papers
that might not be behind the
closed walled garden of a certain
publisher. So, truly open
scientific PDFs. And if you sit
on all of these and you process
it, you can get value out
of it. And I think that
like, a lot of that style
of work has been done by
the frontier labs did much
earlier. You just need to have
a pretty skilled researcher that
understands how things change
models; they bring it in, clean
it, and it's a lot of labor.
When frontier labs scale
researchers, a lot more goes
into data. If you join a
frontier lab and you want to
have impact, the best way to do
it is just find new data that's
better. And then, the fancy,
glamorous algorithmic things like
figuring out how to make o1 is like the
sexiest thought of a scientist. It's
like, "Oh, I figured out how to scale RL."
There's a group that did that, but most of the
contribution is like—
- On the dataset
- ..."I'm gonna make the data better," or, "I'm gonna
make the infrastructure better so everyone on
my team can run experiments 5% faster."
- At the same time, I think it's also one of the
closest guarded secrets, what your training data is,
for legal reasons. And so there's also, I
think, a lot of work that goes into hiding
what your training data was
essentially. Like training the model
to not give away the sources
because you have legal reasons.
- The other thing, to be complete, is that
some people are trying to train on only
licensed data, whereas Common Crawl
is a scrape of the whole internet.
So if I host multiple websites,
I'm happy to have them train language
models, but I'm not explicitly
licensing what governs it. And
therefore, Common Crawl is
largely unlicensed, which means that
your consent really hasn't been
provided for how to use the data. There's another
idea where you can train language models only
on data that has been licensed
explicitly, so that the kind of governing
contract is provided, and I'm not sure
if Apertus is the copyright thing or the
license thing.
I know that the reason that they did it was for
an EU compliance thing, where they wanted to make
sure that their model
fit one of those checks.
- On that note, there's also the
distinction in licensing. Some people
just purchase the license.
Let's say they buy an Amazon
Kindle book, or a Manning book, and then
use that in training. That is a gray
zone 'cause you paid for the content and you
might want to train on it. But then there
are also restrictions where even that
shouldn't be allowed. And so that is
where it gets a bit fuzzy.
And yeah, I think that is
right now still a hot topic.
Big companies like OpenAI
approached private companies
for their proprietary data and
private companies, they become
more and more, let's say,
protective of their data because they
know, "Okay, this is going to be my moat
in a few years." And I do think that's
like the interesting question, where
if LLMs become more commoditized, and I think
a lot of people learn about LLMs, there
will be a lot more people able to train LLMs.
Of course, there are infrastructure challenges.
But if you think of big
industries like pharmaceutical
industries, law, finance industries,
I do think they, at some point, will
hire people from other
frontier labs to build their
in-house models on their proprietary
data, which will be then, again, another
unlock with pre-training that is
currently not there. Because even if you
wanted to, you can't get that data. You
can't get access to clinical trials
most of the time and these types of things.
So, I do think scaling, in that sense,
might be still pretty much
alive if you also look in
domain-specific applications, because we are
still right now, in this year, just looking
at general purpose LLMs on, on ChatGPT,
Anthropic and so forth. They are just
general purpose, they're not even, I think,
scratching the surface of what an LLM
can do if it is really specifically
trained and designed for a specific task.
- I think on the data thing—this is one of the
things that happened in 2025, and we totally
forget it—is Anthropic lost in
court and owed $1.5 billion to
authors. Anthropic, I think,
bought thousands of books and
scanned them and was cleared legally
for that because they bought
the books, and that is kind of going through
the system. And then the other side, they also
torrented some books, and I think this
torrenting was the path where the court
said that they were then culpable to pay these
billions of dollars to authors, which is just
such a mind-boggling lawsuit that
kind of just came and went. That is
so much money- ... from the VC ecosystem.
- These are court cases that will define the
future of human civilization, because it's clear
that data drives a lot of this, and
there's this very complicated human
tension of... I mean, you can
empathize. You're both authors.
And there's some degree to which, I
mean, you put your heart and soul and
your sweat and tears into
the writing that you do. It
feels a little bit like theft
for somebody to train your data
without giving you credit.
- And there are, like Nathan said, also two
layers to it. Someone might buy the book and
then train on it, which could be argued
fair or not fair, but then there
are the straight-up
companies who use pirated
books where it's not even compensating the
author. That is, I think, where people
got a bit angry about it
specifically, I would say.
- Yeah, but there has to be some kind of
compensation scheme. This is like moving towards-
... towards something like
Spotify streaming did-
... originally for music.
You know, what does that-
... compensation look like? You have to define those
kinds of models. You have to think through all of that.
One other thing I think people are generally
curious about, I'd love to get your
thoughts, as LLMs are used more and
more. If you look at even arXiv, but
GitHub, more and more of
the data is generated by
LLMs. What do you do in that kind of
world? How big of a problem is that?
- Largest problem's the infrastructure
and systems, but from an AI point
of view, it's kind of inevitable.
- So it's basically LLM-generated data that's
curated by humans essentially, right?
- Yes, and I think that a lot of open source
contributors are legitimately burning
out. If you have a popular open source
repo, somebody's like, "Oh, I want to do
open source AI. It's good for
my career," and they just vibe-
-code something and they throw it
in. You might get more of this-
- I have a-
- - than I do.
- Yeah, so I have actually
a case study here.
I have a repository called
MLxtend that I developed as a
student around 10 years
ago, and it is a reasonably
popular library still for certain
algorithms, I think especially like frequent
data mining stuff. And
there were recently two or
three people who submitted a lot of
PRs in a very short amount of time.
I do think LLMs have been involved
in submitting these PRs. Me, as the
maintainer, there are two things. First,
I'm a bit overwhelmed. I don't have time to
read through it because, especially as an
older library, that is not a priority for me.
At the same time, I kind of also
appreciate it because I think something
people forget is it's not just using the
LLM. There's still a human layer that
verifies something, and that
is in a sense also how data
is labeled, right? One of
the most expensive things is
getting labeled data for
RL from human feedback
phases. And this is kind of like
that, where it goes through
phases, and then you actually get higher
quality data out of it. And so I don't
mind it in a sense. It can feel overwhelming,
but I do think there is also value
in it.
- It feels like there's a fundamental
difference between raw LLM-generated
data and LLM-generated data
with a human in the loop
that does some kind of verification, even
if that verification is a small percent
of the lines of code.
- I think this goes with anything where
people think also sometimes, "Oh,
yeah. I can just use an LLM to learn
about XYZ," which is true. You can,
but there might be a person who
is an expert who might have used
an LLM to write specific code.
There is kind of like this human work
that went into it to make it nice,
throwing out the not-so-nice
parts to kind of pre-digest
it for you, and that saves
you time. I think that's the
value-add, where you have
someone filtering things or
even using the LLMs correctly.
This is still labor that you
get for free. For example, if
you read a Substack article,
I could maybe ask an LLM to
give me opinions on that, but
I wouldn't even know what to ask.
And I think there is still value in
reading that article compared to me
going to the LLM because you are the
expert. You select what knowledge
is actually spot on, should be
included, and you give
me this very... this
executive summary. And this is
a huge value-add because now I
don't have to waste three to
five hours to go through this
myself, maybe get some incorrect
information and so on. And so I think
that's also where the future
still is for writers even though there are
LLMs that... Can kind of save you time.
- It's kinda fascinating to watch.
I'm sure you guys do this,
but for me, I look at the
difference between a summary
and the original content. Even
if it's a page-long summary of a
page-long content, it's interesting to see
how the LLM-based summary
takes the edge off. What
is the signal it removes from the thing?
- The voice is what I talk about a lot.
- Voice? Well, voice... I would love
to hear what you mean by voice, but
sometimes there's literally insights.
By removing an insight, you're
changing the meaning of
the thing. So I'm continuously
disappointed how bad LLMs are
at really getting to the core
insights, which is what a
great summary does. Yet even if I have
these extremely elaborate prompts where I'm
really trying to dig for the
insights, it's still not
quite there, which... I mean,
that's a whole deep philosophical
question about what is human knowledge
and wisdom and what does it mean to be
insightful and so on. But when you talk
about the voice, what do you mean?
- When I write, I think a lot
of what I'm trying to do is
take what you think as a
researcher, which is very raw. A
researcher is trying to encapsulate
an idea at the frontier of their
understanding and they're trying
to put what is a feeling into
words. I try to do this
in my writing, which
makes it come across as raw but
also high-information in a way that
some people will get it and some won't.
And that's the nature of research.
And language models don't do
this well. They're all trained
with Reinforcement Learning from Human
Feedback, which takes feedback from many
people and averages how the
model behaves from this.
And I think it's going to
be hard for a model to
be very incisive when there's
that sort of filter. This is a
wonderful fundamental problem
for researchers in RLHF. This
provides so much utility in making
the models better, but also
the problem formulation is
kind of... there's this
knot in it that you can't
get past. These language
models don't have this prior in their
deep expression they're trying to get
at. I don't think it's impossible.
There are stories of models that
really shock people. Like, I
think of... I would love to have
tried Bing Sydney. Did that
have more voice? Because
it would so often go off the
rails, which is historically
obviously a scary way—like telling a
reporter to leave his wife—is a crazy model
to potentially put in general
adoption. But that's kind of like
a trade-off; is this RLHF process
in some ways adding limitations?
- That's a terrifying place to be as one
of these frontier labs and companies,
because millions of people are using them.
- There was a lot of backlash
last year with GPT-4o getting
removed, and I've personally never used
the model, but I've talked to people at
OpenAI where they get emails from
users that might be detecting subtle
differences in the deployments
in the middle of the night. And they email
them like, "My friend is different."
And they find these employees' emails
and send them things because they are so
attached to this
set of model weights and configuration
that is deployed to the users.
We see this with TikTok. You
open it... I don't use TikTok,
but supposedly in five minutes the
algorithm gets you. It's locked in.
And those are language models
doing recommendations. I think
there are ways you can do this. Within
five minutes of chatting with it,
the model just gets you.
And that is something that
people aren't really ready for.
Like, don't give that to kids.
At least until we know what's happening.
- But there's also going to be this
mechanism... What's going to happen
with these LLMs as they're
used more and more...
Unfortunately, the nature of the human
condition is such that people commit suicide.
And so what journalists will do
is they will report extensively
on the people who commit suicide.
And they would very likely
link it to the LLMs because they have
that data about the conversations.
If you're really struggling in
your life, if you're depressed,
if you're thinking about suicide, you're
going to probably talk to LLMs about it.
And so what journalists will do is
say, "Well, the suicide was committed
because of the LLM." And that's
going to lead to the companies,
because of legal issues and so on,
more and more taking the edge off
of the LLM. So it's going to be
as generic as possible. It's so
difficult to operate in this space
because you don't want an LLM to cause
harm to humans at that level, but also
this is the nature of
the human experience,
is to have a rich conversation,
a fulfilling conversation,
one that challenges you from which
you grow. You need that edge.
And that's something extremely difficult
for AI researchers on the RLHF front to
actually have to solve, because you're
dealing with the human condition.
- A lot of researchers at these
companies are so well-motivated,
and definitely Anthropic and OpenAI
culturally want to do good for the world.
And it's such a—I'm like, "Ooh,
I don't wanna work on this,"
because on the one hand, a lot of
people see AI as a health ally,
as somebody they can talk to about
their health confidentially,
but then it bleeds all the way into this,
like talking about mental
health, where it's
heartbreaking that this will be the
thing where somebody goes over the edge,
but other people might be saved.
And I'm like, "I don't..."
As a researcher, it's like, I don't want to
train image generation models and release
them openly because I don't want to
enable somebody to have a tool on their
laptop that can harm other people.
I don't have the infrastructure in
my company to do that safely. But
there's a lot of areas like this
where it just needs people that will
approach it with complexity and
conviction. It's just such a hard problem.
- But also, we as a society, as users of these
technologies, need to make sure that we're
having the complicated conversation
about it versus just fearmongering—
that Big Tech is causing harm to
humans or stealing your data.
It's more complicated than
that. And you're right.
There's a very large number of people inside
these companies, many of whom I know,
who deeply care about
helping people. They are
considering the full human experience of
people from across the world, not just Silicon
Valley. People across the United States
and the world, what their needs are.
It's really difficult to
design this one system
that is able to help all these different
kinds of people across different age groups,
cultures, and mental states.
- I wish that the timing of AI was
different relative to the relationship
of Big Tech to the average person.
Big Tech's reputation was so low,
and with how AI is so expensive, it's
inevitably going to be a Big Tech thing.
It takes so many resources,
and people say the US is,
"betting the economy on AI" with this
build-out. To have these be intertwined
at the same time makes for such a
hard communication environment.
It would be good for me to go talk to more
people in the world who hate Big Tech
and see AI as a continuation of this.
- And one of the things you recommend,
one of the antidotes that
you talk about, is to find agency
in this system. As opposed to
sitting back in a powerless
way and consuming the AI slop
as it rapidly takes over the internet.
Find agency by using AI to build stuff,
build apps, build... One, that
actually helps you build intuition,
but two, it's empowering because
you can understand how it works,
what the weaknesses are.
It gives your voice
power to say, "This is a bad use of the
technology, and this is a good use."
And you're more plugged
into the system then,
so you can understand it better and
you can steer it better as a consumer.
- I think that's a good point you brought up about
agency. Instead of ignoring it and saying,
"Okay, I'm not going to use it,"
I think it's probably long-term
healthier to say, "Okay, it's
out there. I can't put it back."
when they came out. How do
I make best use of it, and
how does it help me to up-level myself?
The one thing I worry about here, though,
is, if you just fully use it for something
you love to do, the thing you love to do
is no longer there. And that could
potentially, I feel, lead to burnout.
For example, if I use an LLM
to do all my coding for me,
now there's no coding. I'm just managing
something that is coding for me.
Two years later, let's say, if I
just do that eight hours a day,
having something code for me,
do I feel fulfilled still?
Is this hurting me in terms of being excited
about my job, excited about what I'm doing?
Am I still proud to build something?
- On that topic of enjoyment, it's quite
interesting. We should just throw this in there,
that there's this recent survey of about
791 professional developers, meaning
10-plus years of experience.
- That's a long time. As a junior developer?
- Yeah, in this day and age.
So, there's also many fronts
that are surprising. They break it down
by junior and senior developers.
But, I mean, it just shows
that both junior and senior developers
use AI-generated code in code they ship.
So this is not just for fun or
intermediate learning things.
This is code they ship.
25%—like, most of them
use around 50% or more.
And what's interesting is,
for the category of over 50%
of your code that you ship
is AI-generated, senior
developers are much more likely
to do so. But you don't want AI
to take away the thing you love.
I think this speaks to my experience,
these results I'm about to say.
Together, about 80% of people
find it either somewhat
more enjoyable or significantly more
enjoyable to use AI as part of the work.
- I think it depends on the task. From
my personal usage, for example,
I have a website where I
sometimes tweak things.
I personally don't enjoy
this. So in that sense,
if the AI can help me to implement
something on my website, I'm all for it.
It's great. But then, at the same
time, when I solve a complex problem—
well, if there's a bug,
and I hunt this bug,
and I find it, it's the best feeling
in the world. You feel great.
But now, if you don't
even think about the bug,
you just go directly to the LLM, well, you
never have this kind of feeling, right?
But then there could be
the middle ground where,
well, you try yourself, you
can't find it, you use the LLM,
and then you don't get frustrated because it helps
you and you move on to something that you enjoy.
And so, looking at these statistics,
I think what is not factored in
is that it's averaging over
all the different scenarios.
We don't know if it's for the core task
or if it's for something mundane that
people would not have enjoyed otherwise.
So, in a sense, AI is really great for doing
mundane things that take a lot of work.
For example, my wife the
other day—she has a podcast
for book discussions, a book club, and
she was transferring the show notes from
Spotify to YouTube, and then
the links somehow broke.
And she had in some episodes, because
it is so many books, like 100 links,
and it would have been really painful to
go in there and fix each link manually.
So I suggested, "Hey, let's try ChatGPT."
We copied the text into ChatGPT,
and it fixed them. Instead of two hours
going from link to link fixing
that, it made that type of
work much more seamless.
I think everyone has a
use case where AI is useful
for something that would be
really boring, really mundane.
- For me personally, since we're talking about
coding, and you mentioned debugging...
the source of enjoyment for me, more
on the Cursor side than Claude Code,
is that I have a friend, I have
a pair programmer. It's less
lonely. You made debugging
sound like this great joy.
No, I would say debugging
is like a drink of
water after you've been
going through a desert
for days. You skip the whole desert part
where you're suffering.
Sometimes it's nice to have
a friend who can't really find the bug,
but can give you some intuition about
the code, and together you're
going through the desert and finding
that drink of water. At least
for me, maybe it speaks to the loneliness
of the programming experience.
That is a source of joy.
- It's maybe also related to delayed
gratification. I'm a person who,
even as a kid, I liked
the idea of Christmas
presents—having them, getting
them—better than actually
receiving the presents. I would
look forward to the day I get the
presents, but then it's over and I'm
disappointed. And maybe it's the same
with food. I think food tastes
better when you're really
hungry. You're right, with debugging,
it is not always great. It's often
frustrating, but then if
you can solve it, then it's
great. But there's a sweet Goldilocks
zone; if it's too hard, then
it's just wasting your time. But I think
another challenge is how
will people learn? We
looked at the chart and
saw that more senior
developers are shipping more
AI-generated code than the junior ones.
It's very interesting, because intuitively
you would think it's the junior developers
because they don't know
how to do the thing yet,
and so they use AI to do that
thing. It could mean the AI is
not good enough yet to solve that
task, but it could also mean
experts are more effective
at using it. They know
how to use it better, review the code,
and then they trust the code more.
One issue for society in the future
will be: how do you become an
expert if you never try to do the thing
yourself? One way I always learned
is by trying things myself. If you
look at math textbooks and the
solutions, you learn something,
but you learn actually
better if you try first. Then you
appreciate the solution differently
because you know how to put it
into your mental framework. If
LLMs are here all the time, would
you actually go to the length
of struggling? Would you be willing to
struggle? Struggle is not nice, right? But
if you use the LLM to do everything, at
some point you will never really take
the next step, and then
you will maybe not get that unlock that
you would get as an expert using an
LLM. So, I think there's
like a Goldilocks sweet
spot where maybe the trick
here is you make dedicated
offline time where you study two hours
a day, and the rest of the day use
LLMs. But I think it's important
also for people to still invest in
themselves, in my opinion,
to not just LLM everything.
- Yeah, as a civilization, we each individually
have to find that Goldilocks zone.
And in the programming context as
developers. Now, we've had this fascinating
conversation that started with
pre-training and mid-training.
Let's get to post-training.
A lot of fun stuff in
post-training. So, what are some of the
interesting ideas in post-training?
- The biggest one from 2025 is learning this
reinforcement learning with verifiable
rewards. You can scale up the training
there, which means doing a lot of
this kind of iterative generate-grade
loop, and that lets the
models learn both interesting
behaviors on the tool use and software
side. This could be searching, running
commands on their own and seeing the
outputs, and then also that training
enables this inference time
scaling very nicely. And it just
turned out that this paradigm was
very nicely linked, where this
kind of RL training enables inference time
scaling. But inference time scaling could have
been found in different ways. So, it was kind of
this perfect storm where the models change a lot,
and the way that they're trained is a major
factor in doing so. And this has changed
how people approach
post-training dramatically.
- Can you describe RLVR, popularized by
DeepSeek R1? Can you describe how it works?
- Yeah. Fun fact: I was on the
team that came up with the term
RLVR, which is from our Tulu
3 work before DeepSeek. We
don't take a lot of credit for being
the people to popularize the scaling
RL, but as fun as what
academics get, as an
aside, is the ability
to name and influence
the discourse, because the closed
labs can only say so much. That
one of the things you can do as an academic is
you might not have the compute to train the
model, but you can frame things
in a way that ends up being
described as a community coming
together around this RLVR term, which
is very fun. And then DeepSeek are the
people that did the training breakthrough,
which is, they scaled the
reinforcement learning. You
have the model generate answers and
then grade the completion if it
was right, and then that accuracy is your
reward for reinforcement learning.
So reinforcement learning is
classically an agent that acts in an
environment, and the environment gives
it a state and a reward back,
and you try to maximize this
reward. In the case of language
models, the reward is normally
accuracy on a set of verifiable
tasks, whether it's math
problems or coding tasks. And it
starts to get blurry with things like
factual domains. That is also,
in some ways, verifiable,
or constraints on your instruction,
like respond only with
words that start with A." All of
these things are verifiable in
some way, and the core
idea of this is you find a
lot more of these problems that are
verifiable and you let the model try it
many times while taking
these RL steps, these
RL gradient updates. The
infrastructure evolved from
reinforcement learning from human
feedback, where in that era the score
they were trying to optimize was
a learned reward model of human
preferences. So you kind of changed
the problem domains and that
let the optimization go on to
much bigger scales, which kind of
kickstarted a major change in what the
models can do and how people use them.
- What kind of domains is RLVR amenable to?
- Math and code are the famous
ones, and then there's a lot of
work on what is called the rubrics,
which is related to a word people might
have heard: LLM-as-a-judge.
For each problem,
I'll have a set of problems in my
dataset. I will then have an LLM
and ask it, "What would a good
answer to this problem look
like?" And then you could try the
problem over and over again and
assign a score based on this rubric.
That's not necessarily verifiable like
math and code domains, but
this rubrics idea and other
scientific problems that might be
a little bit more vague is where
the attention is, where they're trying
to push this set of methods into
these kind of more open-ended domains
so the models can learn a lot more.
- I think that's called reinforcement
learning with AI feedback, right?
- That's the older term for it coined
in Anthropic's Constitutional
AI paper. It's like a lot of
these things come in cycles.
- Also, just one step back
for RLVR. I think the
interesting thing here is that
you ask the LLM a, let's say,
math question, and then you know the
correct answer, and you let the LLM,
as you said, figure it out. How
it does it—you don't constrain it
much. There are some constraints like
"use the same language, don't switch
between Spanish and English." But let's
say you're pretty much hands-off.
You only give the question and
the answer, and then the LLM has
the task to arrive at the
right answer, but the
beautiful thing here is what
happens in practice: the LLM will
do a step-by-step description,
like as a student or as
a mathematician would derive the
solution. It will use those steps,
and that helps the model to
improve its own accuracy.
And then, like you said,
the inference scaling.
Inference scaling loosely
means spending more compute
during inference, and here
the inference scaling is
that the model would use more tokens.
In the DeepSeek R1 paper, they
showed the longer they train the
model, the longer the responses are.
They grow over time. They use more
tokens, so it becomes more expensive.
It becomes expensive for simple tasks,
but these explanations help accuracy.
There are also papers showing
what the model explains
does not necessarily have to be
correct or maybe it's unrelated to the
answer, but for some reason, it
still helps the model that it
is explaining. And I think it's
also—again, I don't want to
anthropomorphize these LLMs, but it's
kind of like how we humans operate.
If there's a complex math
problem in a math class,
class, you usually have a note paper and
you do it step by step. You cross out
things. And the model also self-corrects,
and that was, I think, the
aha moment in the DeepSeek R1 paper. They called
it the aha moment because the model itself
recognized it made a mistake and then said,
"Ah, I did something wrong, let me try again."
And I think that's just
so cool that this falls
out of just giving it the correct answer
and having it figure out how to do
it, that it kind of does in a
sense what a human would do.
Although LLMs don't think like humans, it's
kind of like an interesting coincidence
and it... And the other nice
side effect is it's great for
us humans often to see these steps.
It builds trust, but also we
us humans to see these steps. It builds trust,
but also we learn and can double check things.
- There's a lot in here. I think
some of the debate... There's been a lot of
debate this year on if the language models
like these... I think the aha moments
are kind of fake because in pre-training
you essentially have
seen the whole internet.
so you have definitely seen people
explaining their work, even verbally, like
a transcript of a math lecture. "You try
this, oh, I messed this up." And what RLVR
is very good at doing is amplifying
these behaviors because they're very useful
in enabling the model to think longer and to
check its work. And I agree that
it is very beautiful that this
training kind of... The model learns to amplify
this in a way that is so useful for the
final answers being better.
- I can give you also a hands-on example. I
was training the Qwen 3 base model with
RLVR on MATH-500. The base model had an
accuracy of about 15%. Just 50 steps,
like in a few minutes with
RLVR, the model went from
15% to 50% accuracy. And the
model... You can't tell me
it's learning anything
fundamentally about math in
- The Qwen example is weird because there've been
two papers this year, one of which I was on, about
data contamination in Qwen
and specifically that they train on a
lot of this special mid-training phase
that we should take a minute
on, because it's weird
because they train on problems
that are almost identical to MATH.
- Exactly. And so you can
see that basically the RL,
it's not teaching the model any new knowledge
about math. You can't do that in 50 steps.
So the knowledge is already there, in the
pre-training, you're just unlocking it.
- I still disagree with the premise because
there's a lot of weird complexities that you
can't prove because
one of the things that points to weirdness is
that if you take the Qwen 3 so-called base
model and you... You
could Google like "math
dataset, Hugging Face", and you could take
a problem and what you do if you put it
into Qwen 3 base... All these math problems
have words, so it'd be like "Alice
has five apples and takes one... and gives
three to whoever," and there are these
word problems. With these Qwen-based
models, why people are suspicious of them
is if you change the
numbers but keep the words-
Qwen will produce, without
tools, will produce a
very high accuracy decimal representation
of the answer, which means there's
some... At some time, it was shown
problems that were almost identical
to the test set, and it was using
tools to get a very high precision answer,
but a language model without tools
will never actually have this.
So it's kind of been this
big debate in the research community:
how much of these reinforcement learning
papers that are training on Qwen
and measuring specifically on this
math benchmark, where there's been multiple
papers talking about contamination, is like,
how much can you believe them? And I think
this is what caused the reputation of RLVR
being about formatting, because you
can get these gains so quickly,
therefore it must already be in the model. But
there's a lot of complexity here that we...
It's not really like controlled
experimentation, so we don't really know.
- But if it weren't true, I would say
distillation wouldn't work, right?
I mean, distillation can work to
some extent, but the thing is that
is, I think, the biggest problem, and I research this
contamination because we don't know what's in the
data. Unless you have a new dataset,
it is really impossible. And the
same, you mentioned the math dataset,
where you have a question and
then answer and an explanation is given,
but then also even something simpler
like MMLU, which is a multiple-choice
benchmark. If you just
change the format slightly,
like, I don't know, if you
use a dot instead of a parenthesis
or something like that, the
model accuracy will vastly differ.
- I think that that could be like a model
issue rather than a general issue.
- It's not even malicious by the developers of the LLM,
like, "Hey, we want to cheat at that benchmark."
It has seen something at some point. I
think the only fair way to evaluate an LLM
is to have a new benchmark that is after
the cutoff date when the LLM was deployed.
- Can we lay out what would
be the recipe of all
the things that go into post-training?
And you mentioned RLVR was
a really exciting, effective thing.
Maybe we should elaborate. RLHF
still has a really important
component to play. What kind of other
ideas are there on post-training?
- I think you can kind of take
this in order. I think you could
view it as what made o1, which
is this first reasoning model,
possible, or what will the
latest model be? And they
actually... You're going to have
similar interventions at these,
where you start with mid-training,
and the thing that is
rumored to enable o1 and similar
models is really careful data
curation, where you're providing
a broad set of what is
called reasoning traces, which
is just the model generating
words in a forward process
that is reflecting, like
breaking down a problem into intermediate steps
and trying to solve them. So at mid-training,
you need to have
data that is similar to this to make it
so that when you move into post-training,
primarily with these verifiable
rewards, it can learn.
And then what is happening
today is you're figuring
out which problems to
give the model and how
out which problems to give the model and how long
you can train it for and how much inference you can
enable the model to use when solving
these verifiable problems. So as
models get better, certain problems
models get better, certain problems are no longer...
The model will solve them 100% of the time, and
therefore there's very little signal
in this. If we look at the GRPO
equation, this one is famous for
this because essentially the
reward given to the agent
is based on how good
a given action—an action is a
completion—is relative to the other
answers to that same problem. So if all the problems
get the same answer, there's no signal in these
types of algorithms. So what they're doing
is they're finding harder problems, which is
why you hear about things like
scientific domains, where it's so
hard to get anything right. If you
have a lab or something, it just
generates so many tokens or much
harder software problems. So the
frontier models are all pushing into these
harder domains when they can train on more
problems and the model will learn
more skills at once. The RLHF
link to this is that RLHF has been
and still is kind of like the
finishing touch on the models, where
it makes the models more useful
by improving the organization or style
or tone. There are different things that
resonate with different audiences, like some
people like a really quirky model and RLHF could
be good at enabling that
personality, and some people hate
this markdown bulleted list
thing that the models do,
but it's actually really good for quickly
parsing information. In RLHF, this
human feedback stage is
really great for putting
this into the model at the end of
the day. It's what made ChatGPT
so magical for people. And that
use has actually remained fairly
stable. This formatting can also help
the models get better at math
problems, for example. So it's
like the border between style
and formatting, and like
the method that you use
to answer a problem is
actually all very closely
linked in terms of when
you're training these models, which is
why RLHF can still make a model better at
math, but these verifiable domains
are a much more direct process to
doing this because it makes
more sense with the problem
formulation, which is why it ends up all
forming together. But to summarize, it's like
mid-training is give the model
the skills it needs to then
learn. RL with verifiable
rewards is letting the model try
a lot of times, so put a lot of compute
into trial-and-error learning across hard
problems. And then RLHF would be like
finishing the model, making it easy to
use and kind of just
rounding the model out.
- Can you comment on the amount
of compute required for RLVR?
- It's only gone up and up.
I think Ilya Sutskever was
famous for saying they use a similar
amount of compute for pre-training and
post-training. Back to the scaling
discussion, they involve very
different hardware for scaling. Pre-training
is very compute-bound, which is like this
FLOPs discussion, which is just how many matrix
multiplications can you get through at once.
And because with RL you're generating
these answers, you're trying the
model in real-world environments, it ends
up being much more memory-bound because
you're generating long sequences
and the attention mechanisms have
this behavior where you get a
quadratic increase in memory
as you're getting to longer sequences.
So the compute becomes very different.
In pre-training we would talk about a
model—if we go back to like the Biden
administration executive order, it's
like 10 to the 25th FLOPs to train a
model. If you're using FLOPs in
post-training, it's a lot weirder because the
reality is just like: how many hours
are you allocating? How many GPUs
for? And I think in terms
of time, the RL compute is
getting much closer because you just
can't put it all into one system.
Pre-training is so computationally dense where
all the GPUs are talking to each other and
it's extremely efficient, whereas RL has all
these moving parts and can take a long time
to generate a sequence of
100,000 tokens. If you think
about GPT-5.2 Pro taking an hour,
it's like, what if your training run
has a sample for an hour and you have to
make sure that's handled efficiently?
So I think in GPU hours
or just wall-clock hours,
the RL runs are probably approaching the
same number of days as pre-training,
but they probably aren't using
as many GPUs at the same time.
There are rules of thumb where in
labs you don't want your pre-training
runs to last more than a month because
they fail catastrophically. And if you
are planning a huge cluster to be
held for two months and then it
fails on day 50, the opportunity
costs are just so big.
So people don't want to put
all their eggs in one basket.
GPT-4 was the ultimate YOLO
run, and nobody ever wanted to
do it before, where it took three months
to train and everybody was shocked that it
worked. I think people are a little
bit more cautious and incremental now.
- So RLVR is more, let's say, unlimited in
how much you can train or still get benefit,
where RLHF, because it's a preference
tuning, you reach a certain point where it
doesn't really make sense to spend more
RL budget on that. So just a step
back with preference tuning:
there are multiple people that
can give multiple, let's say,
explanations for the same thing and they can both
be correct, but at some point you learn a certain
style and it doesn't make
sense to iterate on it. My
favorite example is: if relatives
ask me what laptop they should buy,
I give them an explanation or
ask, "What is your use case?"
They, for example,
prioritize battery life and
storage. Other people like us, for
example, we would prioritize RAM and
compute. Both answers are
correct, but different people
require different answers. With preference
tuning, you're trying to average somehow.
You are asking the data labelers
to give you, not the right,
but the preferred answer and then you
train on that. But at some point you learn
that average preferred answer.
And there's no reason to keep
training longer on it because it's
just a style, whereas with RLVR,
you let the model solve more and more
complex, difficult problems. So I
think it makes more sense to allocate
more budget long-term to RLVR. Also,
right now we are in an RLVR 1.0
blend where it's still that simple
thing where we have a question and
answer, but we don't do anything
with the stuff in between.
There were multiple research
papers, also by Google for example,
on process reward models that
also give scores for the
explanation—how correct is the
explanation. And I think that will be the
next thing, let's say
RLVR 2.0 for this year,
focusing in between question and
answer, like how to leverage that
information, the explanation,
to help it get better
accuracy. So that's one angle.
And there was a DeepSeek
Math-V2 paper where they also had
interesting inference scaling
there where, first, they had
developed models that grade
themselves, a separate model.
And I think that will be one aspect. And
the other, like Nathan mentioned, it will
be for RLVR branching into other domains.
- The place where people are
excited are value functions,
which is pretty similar. So process
reward models are kind of like...
Process reward models assign
how good something is at each
intermediate step in a reasoning
process, where value functions apply
value to every token the language
model generates. Both of these have
been largely unproven in the language
modeling and reasoning model era.
People are more optimistic about
value functions for whatever
reason now. I think process reward
models were tried a lot more
in this pre-o1, pre-reasoning
model era, and a lot of people had a lot of
headaches with them. So I think a lot of it is human
nature...
Value models have a very deep history in
reinforcement learning. They're one of the
first things core to deep
reinforcement learning existing, is
training value models. So
right now people are excited
about trying value models, but there's
very little proof. And there are negative
examples in trying to scale
up process reward models.
These things don't always hold
in the future. We came to this
discussion by talking about scaling.
The simple way to summarize what you're
saying is you don't want to do too much
RLHF, where the signal doesn't scale.
People have worked on RLHF for language
models for years, especially with intense
interest after ChatGPT.
And the first release
of a reasoning model trained with
RLVR, OpenAI's o1, had a scaling
plot where if you increase training
compute logarithmically, you get a linear
increase in evaluations. This has been
reproduced multiple times. DeepSeek
had a plot like this. But there's no
scaling law for RLHF where if you
log-increase the compute, you get
performance. In fact, the seminal scaling
paper for RLHF is scaling laws for
reward model over-optimization.
So that's a big line to
draw with RLVR and the
methods we have now. In the future,
they will follow this scaling
paradigm: where you can let
the best runs run for an
extra 10x and you get performance,
but you can't do this with
RLHF. And that is just going to be
field-defining in how people approach
them. While I'm a shill for
people to academically do RLHF,
to do the best RLHF you might not
need the extra 10 or 100x of
compute, but to do the best
RLVR you do. I think
there's a seminal paper
from a Meta internship. It's
called something like "The Art of
Scaling Reinforcement Learning with
Language Models." What they describe as a
framework is Scale-RL. Their
incremental experiment
was like 10,000 V100 hours,
which is like thousands or
tens of thousands of dollars per
experiment. They do a lot of them, and
This cost is not accessible to the average
academic, which is a
hard equilibrium where
it's trying to figure out how
to learn from each community.
- I was wondering if we could take
a bit of a tangent and talk
about education and learning.
If you're someone listening
to this who's a smart person
interested in programming
and AI, I presume building something
from scratch is a good beginning.
So can you take me through what
you would recommend people do?
- I would personally start, like you
said, implementing a simple model from
scratch that you can run on
your computer. The goal is not,
when you build a model from scratch,
to have something for every day use.
It's not going to be your
personal assistant replacing
an existing open-weight model or
ChatGPT. It's to see what exactly
goes into the LLM, what comes out,
and how the pre-training works
on your own computer, preferably.
Then you learn about pre-training,
supervised fine-tuning, and the
attention mechanism. You get a solid
understanding of how things work, but
at some point you reach a limit, because
small models can only do so much.
The problem with learning about
LLMs at scale is that it's
exponentially more complex
to make a larger model,
because the model isn't just
larger—you have to shard your
parameters across multiple GPUs. Even
for the KV cache, there are multiple
ways to implement it. One is just to
understand how it works, just to grow the
cache. You grow it step-by-step
by, let's say, concatenating
lists, but then that
wouldn't be optimal on
GPUs. You would pre-allocate
a tensor and then fill it in.
But that adds another 20 or 30
lines of code. And for each thing,
you add so much code. The goal with
the book is basically to understand
how the LLM works. It's not going to be a
production-level LLM, but once you have
that, you can understand
the production-level LLM.
- So you're trying to always build an
LLM that's going to fit on one GPU?
- Yes. Most of them do. I have
some bonus materials on some
MoE models. One or two of them
may require multiple GPUs,
but the goal is to have it on one
GPU. And the beautiful thing is,
you can self-verify. It's almost
like RLVR. When you code these from
scratch, you can take an existing
model from the Hugging Face
Transformers library. The
library is great, but if
you want to learn about LLMs, it's not
the best place to start because the
code is so complex to
fit so many use cases.
Because people use it in production,
it has to be really sophisticated,
really intertwined, and hard
to read. It's not linear.
- It started as a fine-tuning
library, and then it grew to be the
standard representation of
every model architecture.
Hugging Face is the default place to get a
model, and Transformers is the software.
It enables it so people can easily load
a model and do something basic with it.
- And all frontier labs that have
open-weight models have a Transformers
version of it, like from DeepSeek
to gpt-oss-120b. That's the
canonical weight format
you can load. But even
even Transformers, the library, is
not used in production. People use
SGLang or vLLM, and it adds
another layer of complexity.
- We should say that the Transformers
library has like 400 models.
- So it's the one library that tries
to implement a lot of LLMs, and
so you have a huge codebase,
basically. It's huge. It's
like, I don't know, maybe millions—
- That's crazy.
- hundreds of thousands of lines
of code. Understanding the part
you want to understand is finding the needle
in the haystack. But what's beautiful is
you have a working implementation, so
you can work backwards. What I would
recommend doing, or what I also do, is if I
want to understand, for example, how OLMo
is implemented, I would look at the
weights in the model hub, the config file,
and then you can see, "Oh,
they used so many layers. They
use, let's say, Group Query Attention
or Multi-Head Attention in that case."
Then you see all the components in a
human-readable, 100-line config file.
And then you start, let's say, with
your GPT-2 model and add these things.
The cool thing here is you can
then load the pretrained weights
and see if they work in your
model. You want to match the
same output that you get with a Transformer
model, and then you can use that,
basically as a verifiable reward
to make your architecture correct.
Sometimes it takes me a day. With
OLMo 3, the challenge was RoPE
for the position embeddings.
They had a YaRN extension
and there was some custom scaling there,
and I couldn't quite match
these things. In this struggle,
you kind of understand things. At the
end, you know you have it correct
because you can unit test it. You
can check against the reference
implementation. I think that's one
of the best ways to learn, really.
To basically reverse-engineer something.
- I think that is something everyone
interested in getting into AI
today should do. That's why
I liked your book. I came to
language models from the RL and
robotics field. I had never taken the
time to just learn all the fundamentals.
This transformer architecture
is so fundamental, just as deep
learning was in the past,
and people need to do this.
I think where a lot of
people get overwhelmed
is, "How do I apply this to have
impact or find a career path?"
Because language models make this
fundamental stuff so accessible,
and people with motivation
will learn it. Then it's like,
"How do I get cycles on goal
to contribute to research?"
I'm actually fairly optimistic
because the field moves so fast
that a lot of times the best
people don't fully solve a problem
because there's a bigger problem to
solve that's very low-hanging fruit,
so they move on. I think that a lot
of what I was trying to do in this
RLHF book is take post-training
techniques and describe how
people think about them influencing
the model and what people are doing.
Then it's remarkable how many things
I just think people stop
studying or don't pursue.
I think people trying to go narrow
after doing the fundamentals is good,
and then reading the relevant papers
and being engaged in the ecosystem.
It's like you actually...
actually... The proximity that
random people online have
to the leading researchers—no
one knows who all the...
The anonymous accounts on X and ML are
very popular, and no one knows who
all these people are. It could just be random people
that study this stuff deeply, especially with
the AI tools. To just be like, "I don't
understand this, keep digging into it," is a
very useful thing. But there's
a lot of research areas that
maybe have three papers that
you need to read, and then
one of the authors will probably email
you back. But you have to put in a lot
of effort into these emails to
understand the field. I think it would
be for a newcomer easily weeks
of work to feel like they can
truly grasp what is a very
narrow area, but I think going
narrow after you have the fundamentals
will be very useful to people because
I've become very interested in
character training, which is how you
make the model funny or
sarcastic or serious,
and what do you do to the
data to do this? A student
at Oxford reached out to me and was like, "Hey,
I'm interested in this," and I advised him.
And that paper now exists.
There's like two or
three people in the world that were very
interested in this. He's a PhD student, which
gives him an advantage, but
for me, that was a topic I was waiting for
someone to be like, "Hey, I have time to spend
cycles on this." I'm sure there's a lot more
very narrow things where you're just like,
"It doesn't make sense that there was
no answer to this." I think it's just
there's so much information coming that
people are like, "I can't grab onto any of
these," but if you just stick in an area, I think
there's a lot of interesting things to learn.
- Yeah, I think you can't try to do it all
because it would be very overwhelming and
you would burn out. For me, for
example, I haven't kept up with
computer vision in a long time; I just focused
on LLMs. But coming back to your book,
I think this is a really great book and
a really good bang for the buck because
if you want to learn about RLHF, I
wouldn't go out there and read RLHF
papers because you would
be spending two years—
- Some of them contradict.
I've just edited the book, and there's
no chapter where I had to be like,
"X papers say one thing and Y papers
say another, and we'll see what
comes out to be true."
- Just to go through the table of contents, what
are some ideas we might have missed in the
bigger picture of post-training? First of
all, you did the problem setup, training
overview, what are preferences,
preference data, and the optimization
tools, reward modeling,
regularization, instruction tuning,
rejection sampling, and
reinforcement learning. Then,
Constitutional AI and AI feedback,
reasoning, and inference-time
scaling to use in function calling,
synthetic data and distillation,
evaluation, and then an
open questions section,
over-optimization, style and
information, and then product
UX, character and post-training.
What are some ideas worth
mentioning that connect both the
educational and the research components?
You mentioned character training,
which is pretty interesting.
- Character training is interesting because there's
so little on it. We talked about how people
engage with these models. We
feel good using them because
they're positive, but that can go too far;
it can be too positive. And it's like,
essentially, it's: How
do you change your data
and decision-making to make it
exactly what you want? And like,
OpenAI has this thing called a model
spec, which is essentially their
internal guideline for what they want the
model to do, and they publish this to
developers. So, essentially, you
can know what is a failure of
OpenAI's training—where they have the
intentions and they haven't met them yet—
versus what is something that they actually
wanted to do and that you don't like.
And that transparency is very nice,
but all the methods for curating these
documents and how easy it is to follow
them is not very well known. I think the
way the book is designed is that the RL
chapter is obviously what people want because
everybody hears about it with RLVR, and
it's the same algorithms and the same
math, but you can use it in
very different documents.
So I think the core of
RLHF is like how messy
preferences are. It's essentially
a rehash of a paper I
wrote years ago, but this is essentially
the chapter that'll tell you why
RLHF is never ever fully solvable because,
the way that even RL is set up, it
assumes that preferences can be
quantified and that multiple
preferences can be reduced
to single values. And I think it relates
in the economics literature to the
Von Neumann-Morgenstern utility theorem,
and that is the chapter where all
of that philosophical,
economic, and psychological
context tells you what gets compressed
into doing RLHF. So it's like you
have all of this and then later in the book
it's like: You use this RL map to make the
number go up. And I think that's why
it'll be very rewarding for people to do
research on, because quantifying
preferences is something
that humans have designed
a problem in order to
make preferences studyable. But there's
kind of fundamental debates, like,
an example is in a language model response you
have different things you care about, like
accuracy or style. And when you're
collecting the data, they all get compressed
into: "I like this more
than another." And that is
happening, and there's a lot of
research in other areas of the
world that go into how you
should actually do this. I think
social choice theory is the
subfield of economics around how
you should aggregate preferences.
And I went to a workshop
that published a white
paper on: "How can you think about
using social choice theory for
RLHF?" So I mostly would want people
that get excited about the math to
come and find things where they
could stumble into this broader
context. I think there's a fun thing:
I just keep a list of all the tech
reports of reasoning models
I like. So in Chapter 14,
where there's a short summary of RLVR,
there's just a gigantic table where I
list every single reasoning
model that I like.
I think in education, a lot of it needs
to be like, at this point, what I like,
because the language models are so
good at the math. For example, the
famous paper, Direct Preference Optimization,
which is a much simpler way of solving
the problem than RL. The derivations
in the appendix skip steps
of math. And for this book, I redid
the derivations and I'm like,
"What the heck is this log trick
that they use to change the math?"
But doing it with language models, they're
like, "This is the log trick." And I'm
like, "I don't know if I like this,
that the math is so commoditized."
I think some of the struggle
in reading this appendix-
...and following the math
is good for learning.
- Yeah, we're returning to this
often on the topic of education.
You both have brought up the
word "struggle" quite a bit.
So there is value. If you're not
struggling as part of this process,
you're not fully following the
proper process for learning.
proper process for learning, I suppose.
- Some providers are working on models
for education designed to not give-
actually, I haven't used them, but I'd
guess they're designed to not give
all the information at once.
And make people work for it. Training models
to do this would be a wonderful contribution.
Where, like all of the stuff in the book,
you had to reevaluate every decision.
decision for it- It's a great example.
There's a chance we work on it at Ai2,
which I thought would be so fun.
- It makes sense. I did something like
that the other day for video games.
Sometimes for pastime I play
video games, like I like-
Video games with puzzles, like
Zelda and Metroid. And there's this
new game where I really got
stuck and was okay with it.
I don't want to struggle for
two days, so I used an LLM.
But then you say, "Hey, please don't add
spoilers. Just, you know, I'm here and there.
What do I have to do next?" You can do
the same thing for math where you say,
"Okay, I'm stuck at this point.
Don't give me the full solution,
but what is something I could try?"
Where you carefully probe it.
But the problem here is I
think it requires discipline.
Many people enjoy math, but
there are also a lot of people
who need to do it for their homework,
and then it's like a shortcut.
We could develop an educational LLM,
but other LLMs are still there,
and there's still a temptation
to use the other LLMs.
- I think many people in college understand
the stuff they're passionate about-
about- ...they're self-aware and they
understand it shouldn't be easy.
I think we just have to
develop a good taste-
...talk about research
taste, school taste about
stuff that you should be struggling on-
...and stuff you shouldn't be. It's tricky,
because you don't have good long-term vision
sometimes you don't have
good long-term vision
about what would be actually
useful to you in your career.
But you have to develop that taste, yeah.
- I was talking to my fiancee
or friends about this,
there's this brief 10-year window
where all of the homework and all the
exams could be digital. Before that, everybody
had to do all the exams in blue books
because there was no other way. And now after AI,
everyone's going to need to be in blue books and
oral exams because everyone could cheat so easily.
It's like this brief generation that had a
different education system
where everything could be
digital, but you still couldn't
cheat. And now it's just going back.
It's just very funny.
- You mention character training.
Just zooming out on a more general
topic, for that project
how much compute was
required? And in general,
to contribute as a
researcher, are there places where not too
much compute is required where you can
actually contribute as an individual
researcher?
- For the character training thing, I think
this research is built on fine-tuning
about 7 billion parameter
models with LoRA, which is
essentially only fine-tuning a small
subset of the weights of the model.
I don't know exactly how many
GPU hours that would take.
- But it's doable.
- Not doable for every academic. The
situation for some academics is so dire
that the only work you can do is doing
inference where you have closed models or open
models and you get completions from them
and you can look at them and understand the
models. And that's very well-suited
to evaluation, where you want to
be the best at creating representative
problems that the models fail on or
show certain abilities, which I think
that you can break through
with this. I think that
the top-end goal for a researcher
working on evaluation, if you
want to have career momentum, is
that Frontier Labs pick up your
evaluation. You don't need to have
every project do this. But if you
go from a small university with no compute and
find something that Claude struggles with,
and then the next Claude model has
it in the blog post, there's your
career rocket ship. I think
that's hard, but if you want to
scope the maximum possible impact
with minimum compute, it's something
like that, which is just get very narrow
and it takes learning of where the
models are going. So you need
to build a tool that tests
where Claude 4.5 will fail.
If I'm going to start
a research project, I need to think where the
models in eight months are going to be struggling.
- But what about developing
totally novel ideas?
- This is a trade-off. I think that if you're
doing a PhD, you could also be like,
"It's too risky to work in language
models. I'm going way longer term,"
which is like what is—
what is the thing that's going to define
language model development in 10 years?
I end up being a person that's
pretty practical. I mean, I went to
my PhD where it was like, "I got into Berkeley.
Worst case, I get a master's, and then I go
work in tech." I'm very
practical about it, so I'm like
the life afforded to people to work at
these AI companies, the amount of...
OpenAI's average compensation is over
a million dollars in stock a year per
employee. For any normal
person in the US, to
get into this AI lab is transformative for
your life. So I'm pretty practical about it.
there's still a lot of upward mobility
working in language models if you're
focused. And look at these jobs.
But from a research perspective,
the transformative impact in these
academic awards... to be the next
Yann LeCun is from not working on—
not caring about language
model development very much.
- It's a big financial
sacrifice in that case.
- So I work with some awesome students, and
they're like, "Should I go work at an
AI lab?" And I'm like, "You're getting
a PhD at a top school. Are you gonna
leave to go to a lab?" I don't
know. If you go work at a top lab,
I don't blame you. Don't go work at some random
startup that might go to zero. But if you're going to
OpenAI, I'm like, "It could
be worth leaving a PhD for."
- Let's more rigorously think
through this. So where would you
give a recommendation for people to do
a research contribution? So the options
are academia: get a PhD.
Spend five years publishing.
Compute resources are
constrained. There's—
there's research labs that are more
focused on open-weight models,
and working there. Or closed
frontier research labs.
So OpenAI, Anthropic, xAI, and so on.
- The two gradients are: the more closed,
the more money you tend to get,
but you also get less
credit. In terms of building
a portfolio of things that
you've done, it's very clear
what you have done as an academic.
Versus if you are going to
trade this fairly reasonable
progression for being a cog in the
machine, which could also be very fun.
So I think it's very different
career paths. But the
opportunity cost for being a researcher
is very high because PhD students are
paid essentially nothing. So it ends
up rewarding people that have a
fairly stable safety net, and they
realize that they can operate in the
long term, wanting to do very interesting
work and get a very interesting job.
So it is a privileged position to be like,
"I'm gonna see out my PhD and figure it
out after because I want to do this."
At the same time, the academic ecosystem
is getting bombarded by funding
getting cut and stuff. So there's just
so many different trade-offs where I
understand plenty of people that are like,
"I don't enjoy it. I can't deal with this
funding search. My grant got cut
for no reason by the government,"
or, "I don't know what's gonna
happen." So I think there's a lot of
uncertainty and trade-offs
that, in my opinion, favor just
taking the well-paying job with
meaningful impact. It's not like
you're getting paid to sit around at OpenAI.
You're building the cutting edge of things
that are— changing millions of
people's relationship to tech.
- But publication-wise, they're being
more secretive, increasingly so.
So you're publishing less and
less. And so you are having
a positive impact at scale, but
you're a cog in the machine.
- I think it honestly
hasn't changed that much.
I have been in academia. I'm
not in academia anymore.
wouldn't want to miss my time in academia.
But what I wanted to say before I get to that
is that I think it hasn't changed
that much. I was working in
computational biology, using
AI or machine learning methods
with collaborators, and a lot of
people went from academia directly to
Google. And I think it's the
same. Back then, professors were
sad that their students went into industry
because they couldn't carry on their
legacy. I think it's the same.
It hasn't changed that much.
The only thing that has
changed is the scale. Cool
stuff was always developed in
industry that was closed.
You couldn't talk about it.
And I think the difference
now is your preference.
Do you like to publish your
work, or are you more in a
closed lab? That's one difference.
The compensation, of course,
is another, but it's
always been like that.
It depends on where you feel
comfortable. And nothing is
forever. Right now, there's
a third option, which is
launching a startup. A lot
of people are doing that.
It's a very risky move, but it can be
a high-risk, high-reward situation,
whereas joining an industry lab
is pretty safe. You also
have upward mobility.
I think once you've been at an
industry lab, it's easier to find
future jobs. But then again,
how much do you enjoy the team
and working on proprietary
things versus how much you like
publishing work? I mean,
publishing is stressful.
Acceptance rates at
conferences can be arbitrary
and very frustrating, but it's
high reward if you have a paper
published. You feel good because your name
is on there. It's a high accomplishment.
- I feel like my friends who are professors
seem happier than those who work at
a frontier lab, to be honest.
There's a grounding there.
The frontier labs
definitely do this 9-9-6,
which is shorthand for
working all the time.
- Can you describe 9-9-6? It's a
culture invented, I believe,
in China and adopted in Silicon Valley.
What is 9-9-6? It's 9:00 AM to 9:00 PM,
- Six days a week.
- six days a week. What is that, 72 hours?
Okay. So, is this basically the standard
in AI companies in Silicon Valley?
This kind of grind mindset.
- Yeah, I mean, maybe not exactly like that,
but I think there is a trend towards it.
And it's interesting. I think it
almost flipped because when I was in
in academia, I felt like that. As
a professor, you write grants,
you teach, and you do research.
It's like three jobs in one,
and it's more than a full-time
job if you want to be successful.
successful. And I feel like
now, like Nathan just said,
the professors, in comparison
to a lab, I think they have
less pressure or workload than
at a frontier lab because—
- I think they work a lot. They're just
so fulfilled. By working with students—
and having a constant runway of
mentorship and a mission that is
very people-oriented, I think in a
era when things are moving very fast
and are very chaotic, it's
very rewarding to people.
- Yeah, and I think at a startup,
it's this pressure. It's like
you have to make it. And it's really
important that people put in the time,
but it is really hard because you
have to deliver constantly, and
I've been at a startup. I had a good
time, but I don't know if I could do it
forever. It's an interesting pace and it's
exactly like we talked about in the
beginning. These models are leapfrogging
each other, and they are just
constantly trying to take the
next step compared to their competitors.
It's just ruthless right now.
- I think this leapfrogging nature and
having multiple players is actually an
underrated driver of language modeling
progress where competition is
so deeply ingrained in people, and these
companies have intentionally created
very strong cultures. Like, Anthropic is
known to be so culturally, like, deeply
committed and organized. I mean,
we hear so little from them, and
everybody at Anthropic seems very
aligned. And it's like being in
a culture that is super
tight and having this competitive
dynamic is a thing that's gonna
make you work hard and create
things that are better.
But that comes at the cost of
human capital, which is like
you can only do this for so long, and
people are definitely burning out.
I wrote a post on burnout
as I've tread in and out
of this myself, especially trying to
be a manager, full-mode training.
It's a crazy job doing this. The
book Apple in China by Patrick
McGee, he talked about how hard the Apple
engineers worked to set up the supply
chains in China, and he was like, they
had "saving marriage" programs, and
he told in a podcast, he
was like, "People died
from this level of working
hard." So I think it's just like
it's a perfect environment for
creating progress based on human
expense, and there's
gonna be a lot of... the
human expense is the 996 that we
started this with, which is like—
... people do really grind.
- I also read this book. I think they had a
code word for if someone had to go home
to spend time with their family to save
the marriage, and it's crazy. Then the
colleagues said, "Okay, this is like red
alert for this situation. We have to let
that person go home this weekend."
But at the same time, I don't
think they were forced to work. They were so
passionate about the product, I guess, that
you get into that mindset. And
I had that sometimes as an
academic, but also as an independent
person, I have that sometimes. I overwork,
and it's unhealthy. I had back
issues, I had neck issues, because I
did not take the breaks that I maybe
should have taken. But no one forced
me to; it's because I wanted to
work, because it's exciting stuff.
- That's what OpenAI and Anthropic are
like. They want to do this work.
- Yeah, but there's also a
feeling of fervor that's
building, especially in Silicon Valley,
aligned with the scaling laws idea, where
there's this hype where the world
will be transformed in a scale of
weeks and you want to be at the
center of it. And then, you know,
I have this great fortune of having
conversations with a wide
variety of human beings,
and from there I get to see all these
bubbles and echo chambers across
the world. It's fascinating to see how
we humans form them. And I think it's
fair to say that Silicon Valley is a
kind of echo chamber, a kind of silo and
bubble. I think bubbles are
actually really useful and
effective. It's not necessarily a negative
thing because you could be ultra-productive.
It could be the Steve Jobs
reality distortion field, because
you just convince each other that
breakthroughs are imminent, and
by convincing each other of
that, you make the breakthroughs imminent.
- Byrne Hobart wrote a book classifying
bubbles. One of them is financial bubbles,
which is like speculation, which is bad,
and the other one is for build-outs,
because it pushes people to build
these things. And I do think AI is in
this, but I worry about it transitioning
to a financial bubble, which is
- Yeah, but also in the space of ideas, that
bubble—you are doing a reality distortion
field, and that means you are
deviating from reality. And if
you go too far from reality while
also working, you know, 996,
you might miss some fundamental
aspects of the human experience,
including beyond Silicon Valley. This
is a common problem in Silicon Valley:
it's a very specific geographic
area. You might not understand the
Midwest perspective, the full
experience of all the other humans in
the United States and across the world,
and you speak a certain way to each other,
you convince each other of a certain
thing, and that can get you
into real trouble. Whether AI
is a big success and becomes
a powerful technology
or it's not, in either trajectory
you can get yourself into
trouble. So you have to consider
all of that. Here you are, a young
person trying to decide what
you want to do with your life.
- The thing that is... I don't even
really understand this, but the
SF AI memes have gotten to the point
where "permanent underclass" was
one of them, which was the idea
that the last six months of
2025 was the only time to
build durable value in an AI
startup or model. Otherwise, all
the value will be captured by
existing companies and you will
therefore be poor, which...
that's an example of the SF
thing that goes so far. I still
think for young people going to be
able to tap into it, if you're really
passionate about wanting to have an
impact in AI, being physically in
SF is the most likely place where
you're going to do this. But it has
has trade-offs.
- I think SF is an incredible
place, but there is a bit of
a bubble. And if you go into
that bubble, which is extremely
valuable, just get out also. Read history
books, read literature, visit
other places in the world.
Twitter and Substack are
not the entire world.
- I would say, one of the people I worked
with is moving to SF, and it's like, I
need to get him a copy of Season of the
Witch, which is a history of SF from
1960 to 1985, which goes through
the hippie revolution, like all the
gays taking over the city and that
culture emerging, and then the
HIV/AIDS crisis and other things. And
it's just like, that is so recent, and
so much turmoil and hurt,
but also love in SF.
And it's like, no one knows about this. It's a
great book, Season of the Witch. I recommend it.
A bunch of my SF friends who
get out recommended it to me. And
I think that's just like living
there... I lived there and I didn't
appreciate this context, and it's
just so recent.
- Yeah. Okay, let's... We talked a lot
about a lot of things. Certainly about
the things that were exciting
last year. But this year,
One of the things you guys mentioned
that's exciting is the scaling of text
diffusion models, and just a different
exploration of text diffusion. Can you talk
about what that is and what
the possibility it holds?
So, different kinds of
approaches than the current LMs?
- Yeah, so we talked a lot about the transformer
architecture and the autoregressive
transformer architecture specifically,
like GPT. And it doesn't mean no one
else is working on anything else.
So, people are always on the,
let's say, lookout for the next big
thing. Because I think it would be almost
stupid not to. Because sure,
right now, the transformer
architecture is the thing, and it works
best, and there's, right now, nothing
else out there. But, you know, it's always a
good idea to not put all your eggs into one
basket. So, people are developing
other alternatives to the
autoregressive transformer. One of
them would be, for example, text
diffusion models. And listeners may
know diffusion models from image
generation, like Stable Diffusion
popularized it. There was a paper on
generating images. Back then, people
used GANs, Generative Adversarial
Networks. And then there was this
diffusion process where you iteratively
denoise an image, and that resulted
in really good quality images over
time. Stable Diffusion was a company. Other
companies build their own diffusion models.
And then people are now like, "Okay,
can we try this also for text?"
Doesn't, you know, make intuitive sense
yet, because it feels like, okay, it's not
something continuous like a pixel that we can
differentiate. It's discrete text, so how do
we implement that denoising process? It's
kind of similar to the BERT models by
Google. Like, when you go back to the original
transformer, they were the encoder and
the decoder. The decoder is what we
are using right now in GPT and so
forth. The encoder is more like a
parallel technique where you
have multiple tokens that you
fill in in parallel. GPT models,
they do autoregressive generation,
completing the sentence one
token at a time. And in
BERT models, you have a
sentence that has gaps.
You mask them out, and then
one iteration is filling in
these gaps. Text diffusion is
kind of like that, where you
are starting with some random
text, and then you are
filling in the missing parts or refining
them iteratively over multiple iterations.
And the cool thing here
is that this can do
multiple tokens at the
same time. It's like
the promise of having it more efficient.
Now, the trade-off is, of course,
how good is the quality? It
might be faster, and now
you have this dimension of the denoising process.
The more steps you do, the better the text
becomes. And people...
I mean, you can scale in different
ways. They try to see if that is
maybe a valid alternative to
the autoregressive model in
terms of giving you the same
quality for less compute.
Right now, there are papers that
suggest if you want to get the same
quality, you have to crank up
the denoising steps, and then
you end up spending the same compute you
would spend on an autoregressive model.
The other downside is, while
being parallel sounds appealing,
some tasks are not parallel. Like
reasoning tasks or tool use,
maybe where you have to ask a
code interpreter to give you
an intermediate result. That is tricky
with diffusion models. So, there are some
hybrids, but the main idea is: how
can we parallelize it? It's an
interesting avenue. I think
right now, there are mostly
research models out there, like
LaMDA and some other ones.
I saw some by startups, some
deployed models. There is no
big diffusion model at scale yet,
like on the Gemini or ChatGPT level.
But there was an announcement by Google,
a site where they said they are
launching Gemini Diffusion, and they
put it into context of their Gemini Nano 2
model, and they said basically:
for the same quality on most
benchmarks, we can generate
things much faster. You
mentioned what's next. I don't think the
text diffusion model is going to replace
autoregressive LLMs, but it
will be something maybe for
quick, cheap, at-scale
tasks. Maybe the free
tier in the future will
be something like that.
- I think there are examples where it's already
being used. To paint an example of why this is
better, for example, when
GPT-5 is taking 30 minutes to
respond, it's generating one token at
a time. And this diffusion idea is
essentially to generate all of
those tokens and the completion in
one batch, which is why it could be
way faster. And I think it could be
suited for... the startups I'm hearing
about are code startups where you have a
code base, and you have somebody that's
effectively "vibe coding," and they say,
"Make this change." And a
code diff is essentially a
huge reply from the model, but
it doesn't have to have that
much external context, and you can get it
really fast by using these diffusion models.
One example I've heard is that they
use text diffusion to generate
really long diffs, because doing it
with an autoregressive model would take
minutes, and that time for a user-facing
product causes a lot of churn.
Every second, you lose a lot of users.
So, I think it's going to be this
thing where it's going to—
...grow and have some applications, but I
actually thought that different types of models
were going to be used for different
things much sooner than they have been,
so I kind of trade off. I think the
tool-use point is the one that's stopping
them from being most general purpose
because, for Claude Code and ChatGPT search,
the autoregressive chain is interrupted
with some external tool, and
I don't know how to do that
with the diffusion setup.
- So what's the future of tool use this
year and then in the coming years? Do you
think there's going to be a lot of developments
there, and how that's integrated into the entire
stack?
- I do think right now, it's mostly
on the proprietary LLM side,
but I think we will see more of that
in the open-source tooling. And I
think it is a huge unlock
because then you can really
outsource certain tasks from
just memorization to actual—
you know, instead of having the
LLM memorize what is 23 plus 5,
just use a calculator.
- So do you think that can
help solve hallucination?
- Not solve it, but reduce it.
So the LLM still needs to know
when to ask for a tool call. And the
second one is, well, it doesn't mean the
internet is always correct. You can do
a web search, but let's say I
asked who won the World Cup
in, let's say, 1998; it still needs to
find the right website and get the right
information. You can still go to the
incorrect website and give me incorrect
information. So I don't think it
will fully solve that, but it is
improving it in that sense.
And so another cool paper
earlier this year—I think it was
December 31st, so it's
not technically 2026,
but close—the recursive language model.
That's a cool idea to kind of
take this even a bit further.
Just to explain, Nathan,
you also mentioned earlier,
it's harder to do cool research in academia
because of the compute budget. If I
recall correctly, they did everything with
GPT-5, so they didn't even use local models,
but the idea is, let's say you have a
long-context task; instead of having the
LLM solve all of it in one
shot or even in a chain,
you break it down into sub-tasks.
You have the LLM decide
what is a good sub-task, and then
recursively call an LLM to solve
that. And I think something like
that, adding tools—you know,
each one maybe you have
a huge Q&A task, so each one
goes to the web and gathers
information, and then you pull it together
at the end and stitch it back together.
I think there's going to be a lot of
unlock using things like that where
you don't necessarily improve the LLM
itself; you improve how the LLM is
used and what the LLM can use. One
downside right now with tool use
is you have to give the LLM
permission to use tools. And
that will take some trust, especially
if you want to unlock things
like having an LLM answer emails for
you—or not even answer, but just
sort them for you or select them for you or
something like that. I don't know if I would
today give an LLM access to my emails,
right? I mean, this is a huge risk.
- I think there's a cool... one last point
on the tool use thing. I think that
you hinted at this, and we've both come at
this in our own ways, is that the open versus
closed models use tools in very different
ways, where open models, people go to
Hugging Face and download the model, and then the
person's going to be like, "What tool do I want?"
I don't know, Exa is my preferred search
provider, but somebody else might care
for a different search startup. Where you release
a model, it needs to be useful for multiple
tools, for multiple use cases, which
is really hard because you're making a
general reasoning engine model, which
is actually what gpt-oss-120b is
good for. But on the closed
models, you're deeply integrating
the specific tool into your experience,
and I think that open models will
struggle to replicate some of the
things that I like to do with closed
models, which will be like, you can
reference a mix of public and private
information. And something that I keep
trying every three to six months,
I try Claude Code on the web,
which is just prompting a model to
make an update to some GitHub repository
that I have. And it's just like
that set of secure cloud
environments is just so nice for
just sending it off to do this
thing and then come back to
me, and these will probably help define
some of the local open and closed
niches. But I think initially, because
there was such a rush to get tool use
working, the open models were on the back foot,
which is kind of inevitable. I think there's so
much research, so many resources in
these frontier labs, but it will be
fun when the open models solve this
because it's going to necessitate a bit
more flexible and potentially interesting
model that might work with this recursive
idea to be an orchestrator
and a tool use model,
so hopefully the necessity drives
some interesting innovation there.
- So, continual learning—this
is a longstanding
topic, important problem. I think
that increases in importance as
the cost of training the models
goes up. So can you explain what
continual learning is and how important
it might be this year and in the coming
years to make progress?
- This relates a lot to this kind
of SF zeitgeist of, what is
AGI, which is Artificial General
Intelligence, and what is
ASI, Artificial Superintelligence, and
what are the language models that we
have today capable of doing? I think
the language models can solve a lot
of tasks, but a key milestone
among the AI community is
essentially when AI could
replace any remote worker,
taking in information and solving
digital tasks and doing them. And
the limitation that's
highlighted by people is
that a language model will not learn
from feedback the same way that an
employee does. So if you hire an
editor, the editor will mess up, but
you will tell them. And if you hired a good editor,
they don't do it again. But language models don't
have this
ability to modify themselves and learn very
quickly. So the idea is, if we are going to
actually get to something that
is a true, general adaptable
intelligence that can go into any remote
work scenario, it needs to be able to learn
quickly from feedback
and on-the-job learning.
I'm personally more bullish on language
models being able to just provide
them with very good context.
You said, maybe offline, that
you can write extensive documents
to models where you say,
"I have all this information. Here are
all the blog posts I've ever written.
I like this type of writing. My voice is
based on this." But many people don't provide
this to models, and the models
weren't designed to take this amount
of context previously. Agentic
models are just starting. So it's
this kind of trade-off: do we need
to update the weights of this model
with this continual learning thing
to make them learn fast? Or the
counterargument is we just need to provide
them with more context and information,
and they will have the appearance of learning
fast by having a lot of context and being
smart.
- So we should mention the terminology
here. Continual learning refers to
changing the weights continuously so
that the model adapts and adjusts
based on the new incoming
information, doing so continually,
rapidly, and frequently.
And then the thing you mentioned
on the other side of it
generally will be referred to
as in-context learning. As
you learn stuff, there's a
huge context window. You can
just keep loading it with extra information
every time you prompt the system,
which I think both legitimately
can be seen as learning.
It's just a different place
where you're doing the learning.
- I think, to be honest with you,
continual learning — updating
weights — we already have that in
different flavors. If you think about
how... I think the
distinction here is: do you
do that on a personalized custom
model for each person, or
do you do it on a global model
scale? I think we have that already,
going from GPT-5 to 5.1 and 5.2. It's
maybe not immediate, but it is a
curated update, a quick curated update
where there was feedback about things
they couldn't do, feedback by the
community. They updated the weights,
next model, and so forth. So it
is a flavor of that. Another even
finer-grained example is like
RLVR; you run it, it
updates. The problem is
you can't just do that for each person because
it would be too expensive to update the
weights for each person, and I think
that's the problem. Unless you get...
Even at OpenAI scale, building
the data centers, it would be too
expensive. I think that is only
feasible once you have something
on the device where the cost is on the
consumer. Like what Apple tried to do with the
Apple Foundation models, putting them
on the phone, where they learn from
experience.
- A bit of a related topic, but this kind
of, maybe anthropomorphized term: memory.
What are different ideas for the mechanism of
how to add memory to these systems as we're
increasingly seeing?
Personalized memory especially?
- Right now, it's mostly basically
stuffing things into the context
and then just recalling that.
But again, I think it's expensive because
you have to—you can cache it, but still
you spend tokens on that. And the
second one is you can only do
so much. I think it's more like a preference
or style. I mean, a lot of people do
that when they solve math
problems. You say it's way so you
can add previous knowledge and stuff,
but you also give it certain preference
prompts: "do what I preferred last
time," or something like that. But
it doesn't unlock new capabilities. So
for that, one thing people still use is
LoRA adapters. These are basically,
instead of updating the whole weight
matrix, there are two smaller weight
matrices that you kind of have
in parallel or overlays like
the delta. But yeah, you can
do that to some extent, but then again,
it is economics. There
were also papers, for
example, LoRA learns
less but forgets less.
It's like, there's no free lunch. If you
want to learn more, you need to use more
weights, but it gets more expensive. And
then again, if you learn more, you forget
more, and you have to find that
Goldilocks zone basically.
- We haven't really mentioned it much,
but implied in this discussion is
context length also. Is there a lot
of innovation that's possible there?
- I think the colloquially accepted
thing is that it's a compute and data
problem where you can...
and sometimes small
architecture things like attention
variants. We talked about
hybrid attention models, which
is essentially if you have what
looks like a state space model within
your transformer. And those are
better suited because you have to
spend less compute to model the
furthest along token. I think that,
those aren't free because they have to
be accompanied by a lot of compute or
the right data. How many sequences
of 100,000 tokens do you have in
the world, and where do you get
these? It just ends up being pretty
expensive to scale them. We've gotten
pretty quickly to a million tokens
of input context length. I would
expect it to keep increasing and
get to 2 million or 5 million this year,
but I don't expect it to go to 100
million. That would be like a true
breakthrough, and I think those
breakthroughs are possible. I think of the continual
learning thing as a research problem where
there could be a breakthrough that
just makes transformers work way
better at this and it's cheap. These things
could happen with so much scientific
attention. But turning the crank, it'll
be consistent increases over time.
- Looking at the extremes, I think there's,
again, no free lunch. So, the one
extreme to make it cheap: you have, let's
say, an RNN that has a single state
where you save everything from
the previous stuff. It's like a
specific fixed-size thing,
so you never really grow the
memory because you are stuffing
everything into one state, but
then the longer the context gets, the
more information you forget because
you can't compress everything
into one state. Then on the
other hand, you have the transformers, which
try to remember every token, which is great
sometimes if you want to look up specific
information, but very expensive because you have the
KV cache that grows, the
dot product that grows. But
then, like you said, the Mamba layers—I
mean, they kind of have the same problem.
Like an RNN, you try to compress everything
into one state; you're a bit more selective
there. But then I think it's like
this Goldilocks zone again. With
Nemotron 3, they found a good
ratio of how many attention
layers do you need for the global
information where everything is accessible
compared to having these compressed
states. And I think that's
how we will scale more—by finding better,
let's say, ratios in the
Goldilocks zone, like between
making computing cheap enough
to run, but then also making
it powerful enough to be
useful. And one more plug here,
the Recursive Language Model
paper, that is one of the
papers that tries to kind of address the
long context thing. So what they found
is essentially instead of stuffing
everything into this long context
if you break it up into
multiple smaller tasks, so you
save memory by having multiple
smaller cores, you can actually get
better accuracy than having the
LLM try everything all at once.
I mean, it's a new paradigm. We will see,
you know, there might be other flavors of
that. So I think with that, we
will still make improvement on
long context, but then also, like
Nathan said, I think the problem is for
pre-training itself, we don't have as
many long context documents as other
documents. So it's harder
to study basically
how LLMs behave and stuff
like that on that level.
- There are some rules of thumb where essentially
you pre-train a language model, like OLMo.
we pre-trained at like 8K context
length and then extended to
32K with training. And there are some rules
of thumb where you're essentially doubling
the training context length, it takes
like 2X compute, and then you can
normally like 2 to 4X the
context length again.
So I think a lot of it ends up being
kind of compute bound at pre-training,
which is in this... Like we talked about,
everyone talks about this big increase in
compute for the top labs this year, and
that should reflect in some longer context
windows. But I think on the post-training side,
there are some more interesting things. As we have
agents, the agents are gonna manage
this context on their own, where now
agents, people that use Claude Code a lot dread
the compaction, which is when Claude takes its
entire full 100,000 tokens of work
and compacts it into a bulleted
list. But what the next
models will do—and I'm sure
people are already working on this—is
essentially the model can control when it
compacts and how. So you can essentially
train your RL algorithm where
compaction is an action-
...where it shortens the history and
then the problem formulation will be, "I
want to keep the maximum evaluation
scores that I have gotten
while the model compacts its history to
the minimum length." Because then you
have the minimum amount of tokens that
you need to do this kind of compounding
autoregressive prediction. So there are actually
pretty nice problem setups in this, where
the... Like these agentic models
learn to use their context in a
different way than just plow forward.
- One interesting recent example
would be DeepSeek-V3.2,
where they had a sparse attention
mechanism where they have
essentially a very efficient,
small, lightweight indexer. And
instead of attending to all tokens, it
selects: "What tokens do I actually need?"
I mean, it almost comes back
to the original idea of
attention where you are selective, but
attention is always on, you have maybe zero
weight on some of them, but you use them all. But
they are even more like, "Let's just mask that out
or not even do that."
And even with sliding window attention
in OLMo, that is also kind of that idea.
You have a rolling window where you keep it
fixed, because you don't need everything.
Occasionally, some layers you might, but
it's wasteful. But right now, I think,
if you use everything, you're on the safe
side—it gives you the best bang for the buck
because you never miss information.
And I think this year will be more
about figuring out, like you
said, how to be smarter about
that. Right now, people want to have
the next state-of-the-art, and the
state-of-the-art happens to
be the brute-force, expensive
thing. And then once you have
that, as you said, keep that
accuracy, but let's see how we can
do that cheaper now, with tricks.
- Yeah. All this scaling thing.
The reason we get the Claude
4.5 Sonnet model first is
because you can train it faster and you're
not hitting these compute walls as soon.
They can just try a lot more things and get
the model faster, even though the bigger
model is actually better.
- I think we should say that there's a lot of
exciting stuff going on in the AI space.
My mind has recently
been really focused on
robotics. Today, we almost
entirely didn't talk
about robotics. There's a lot
of stuff on image generation,
video generation. I think it's fair
to say that the most exciting
research work in terms of the
amount, intensity, and fervor is in the
LLM space, which is why I think it's
justified for us to focus on the
LLMs that we're discussing.
But it'd be nice to bring in
certain things that might be
useful. For example, world models—
there's growing excitement on that.
Do you think there will be any
use in this coming year for
world models in the LLM space?
Yes, I do think so. Also with LLMs,
what's interesting here is
that if we unlock more LLM
capabilities, it also automatically
unlocks all the other fields because
it makes progress faster. A lot of
researchers and engineers use LLMs for
coding. So even if they work on
robotics, if you optimize these LLMs
that help with coding,
it pays off. But then,
yes, world models are interesting.
It's basically where you
have the model run a simulation
of the world in a sense, like a
little toy thing of the real
thing, which can, again,
unlock capabilities
regarding data the LLM is
not aware of. It can simulate things.
And I think LLMs happen to work
well by pre-training and
doing next-token prediction.
But we could do this even
more sophisticatedly in a
sense. I think there was a paper by
Meta, a paper called World
Models. So where they
basically apply the concept of
world models to LLMs again,
where instead of just having
next-token prediction and
verifiable rewards, checking the answer
correctness, they also make sure the
intermediate variables are correct.
You know, it's kind of like
the model is learning basically a
code environment in a sense. And I
think this makes a lot of sense.
It's just expensive to do,
but it is making things more
sophisticated, like modeling
the whole thing, not just
the result. And so it can
add more value. I remember when I
was a grad student, there is a...
competition called CASP, I
think, where they do protein
structure prediction. They predict
the structure of a protein
that is not solved yet
at that point. So in a
sense, this is actually great, and I think
we need something like that for LLMs also,
where you do the benchmark, but no one
does. You hand in the results, but no one
knows the solution. And then after
the fact, someone reveals that. But,
AlphaFold, when it came
out, it crushed this
benchmark. I mean, there
were also multiple
iterations, but I remember the
first one. I'm not an expert in
that subject, but the first one
explicitly modeled the physical
interactions of the... You know,
the physics of the molecule.
Also the angles, impossible angles. And then
in the next version, I think they got rid of
this, and just with brute force, scaling
it up. And I think with LLMs, we are
currently in this brute force scaling because
it just happens to work. But I do think at some
point it might make
sense to bring back this
thing. And I think with world
models, I think that is
where I think that might be
actually quite cool. I mean, yeah.
And of course, also for robotics,
which is completely unrelated to LLMs.
- Yeah. And robotics is very explicit.
So there's the problem of locomotion
or manipulation.
Locomotion is much more solved, especially
in the learning domain. But there's a
lot of value, just like with the
initial protein folding systems,
bringing in the traditional model-based
methods. So you don't... it's unlikely
that you can just learn the
manipulation or the whole body, local
manipulation problem end to end.
That's the dream. But then you realize when
you look at the magic of the human hand
and the complexity of the real world,
it's really hard to learn this all the
way through, the way I
guess AlphaFold 2 didn't.
- I'm excited about the robotic learning
space. I think it's collectively
getting supercharged by all the
excitement and investment in
language models generally, where
the infrastructure for training
transformers, which is a general
modeling thing, is becoming
world-class industrial tooling,
where wherever there was a limitation
for robotics, it's just way better.
There's way more compute. And then on top
of that, they take these language models
as kind of central units where you can
do interesting explorative work around
something that already
works. And then I see it
emerging as, kind of like we talked
about, Hugging Face transformers and
Hugging Face. I think when I was at Hugging Face, I was
trying to get this to happen, but it was too early.
It's like these open
robotic models on Hugging
Face, and having people be able to
contribute data and fine-tune them.
I think we're much closer now that the
investment in robotics and self-driving
cars is related and it enables this,
where once you get to the point
where you can have this sort of ecosystem where
somebody can download a robotics model and
maybe fine-tune it to their robot
or share datasets across the world.
There's some work in this
area like RTX, I think it was
a few years ago, where people are starting to
do that. But once they have this ecosystem,
it'll look very different.
And then this whole
post-ChatGPT boom is putting more
resources into that, which I think
is a very good area for doing research.
- This is also resulting in much
better, more accurate, and more
realistic simulators being built, closing
the sim-to-real gap in the robotic
space. But, you know, you mentioned
a lot of excitement in the
robotics space and a lot of
investment. The downside of
that, which happens in
hype cycles, I personally
believe, and most robotics
people believe, that it's not...
Robotics is not going to be solved at the
time scale as being
implicitly or explicitly
promised. And so what happens when
there's all these robotics companies
that spring up and then they don't have
a product that works? Then there's
going to be this kind of
crash of excitement, which is
nerve-wracking. Hopefully something
else will come in and keep swooping
in so that the continued development
of some of these ideas keeps going.
- I think it's also related to the continual
learning issue, essentially, where
the real world is so complex. With LLMs,
you don't really need to have
something learn for the user,
because there are a lot of things
everyone has to do. Everyone maybe wants
to, I don't know, fix their
grammar in their email or
code or something like that. It's more constrained,
so you can kind of prepare the model for
that. But preparing the robot for the
real world is harder. I mean, you
have the robotic foundation
models, and you can learn
certain things like grasping
things. But then again,
everyone's house is different.
It's so different, and that is,
I think, where the robot would have
to learn on the job, essentially.
And that, I guess, is the
bottleneck right now: how to,
customize it on the fly, essentially.
- I don't think I can
possibly understate the
importance of the thing that doesn't
get talked about almost at all
by robotics folks or
anyone, which is safety.
All the interesting complexities we talk
about learning, all the failure modes and
failure cases, everything we've been talking
about with LLMs—sometimes they fail in
interesting ways. All of that is
fun and games in the LLM space.
In the robotic space, in people's homes,
across millions of minutes and billions
of interactions, you really
are almost allowed to fail
never. When you have
embodied systems that are
put out there in the real world,
you just have to solve so many
problems you never thought you'd have to
solve when just thinking about the general
robot learning problem.
- I'm so bearish on in-home learned
robots for consumer purchase. I'm very
bullish on self-driving cars, and I'm
very bullish for robotic automation,
e.g., like Amazon distribution
where Amazon has built whole new
distribution centers designed for robots
first rather than humans. There's a
lot of excitement in AI circles about
AI enabling automation
and mass-scale manufacturing, and I do think that
the path to robots doing that is more reasonable,
where it's a thing that is
designed and optimized to do a
repetitive task that a human could
conceivably do but doesn't
want to. And then I'm much,
but it's also going to take
a lot longer than people
probably predict. I think the leap from
AI singularity to we can now scale
up mass manufacturing in the
US because we have a massive
AI advantage is one that is
troubled by a lot of political
and other challenging problems.
- Let's talk about timelines,
specifically timelines to AGI or
ASI. Is it fair, as a starting point,
to say that nobody really agrees on the
definitions of AGI and ASI?
- I kind of think there's a
lot of disagreement, but
I've been getting pushback where a lot of people
kind of say the same thing, which is like a
thing that could reproduce
most digital economic
work. So, the remote worker
is a fairly reasonable
example. And I think OpenAI's
definition is somewhat
related to that, which is like
an AI that can do a lot of
economically valuable tasks—which I don't
really love as a definition, but I think
it could be a grounding point,
because language models today,
while immensely powerful,
are not this remote worker
drop-in. And there are things that
could be done by an AI that
are way harder than remote
work, which are like finding an unexpected
scientific discovery that you couldn't even posit,
which would be an example of something that
somebody says is an artificial
superintelligence problem. Or,
taking in all medical records and
finding linkages across certain
illnesses that people didn't know, or
figuring out that some common drug can
treat some niche cancer. They would
say that that is a superintelligence
thing. So these are kind of natural
tiers. My problem with it is that it
becomes deeply entwined with the quest
for meaning of AI and these religious
aspects to it. So there's
different paths you can take it.
- And I don't even know if the
remote worker is a good definition
because what exactly is
that? I actually, I mean, I
like... I don't know if you
like the originally titled
AI27 report. They focus more on code and
research taste, so the target there is the
superhuman coder. So they have
several milestone systems:
Superhuman coders,
superhuman AI researcher,
then superintelligent AI
researcher, and then the full ASI,
artificial superintelligence. But
after you develop the superhuman coder,
everything else follows quickly.
There, the task is to have fully
autonomous, automated coding.
So any kind of coding you need
to do in order to perform
research is fully
automated. And from there,
humans would be doing AI research
together with that system, and they will
quickly be able to develop a system that
can actually do the research for you.
That's the idea. And initially their
prediction was 2027, 2028, and now they've
pushed it back by three to four years to
2031 (mean prediction).
Probably my prediction is even
beyond 2031, but at least you can, in a
concrete way, think about how difficult
it is to fully automate programming.
- Yeah, I disagree with some of their
presumptions and dynamics on how
it would play out, but I think
they did good work in the
scenario-defining milestones that are
concrete and tell a useful story, which is
why the reach for this AI 2027 document
transcended Silicon Valley. It's
because they told a good story and they
did a lot of rigorous work to do this.
I think the camp that I fall
into is that AI is so-called
"jagged," which will be excellent at some
things and really bad at some things.
I think that when they're close to this
automated software engineer, what it will
be good at is traditional ML systems
and frontend, the model is
excellent at; but distributed ML,
the models are actually quite bad at
because there's so little training data
on doing large-scale distributed learning.
This is something we already see,
and I think this will just get amplified.
And then it's kind of messier in these
trade-offs, like how you think
AI research works and so on.
- So you think basically a superhuman
coder is almost unachievable,
because of the jagged nature of the
thing, you're just always going to
have gaps in capabilities?
- I think it's assigning completeness to
something where the models are already
superhuman at some types of code.
I think that will continue.
And people are creative, so they'll
utilize these incredible abilities
to fill in the weaknesses of the models
and move really fast. There'll always
be this dance for a long
time between the humans
enabling the thing that the model
can't do. And the best AI researchers
are the ones that can
enable this superpower.
And I think those lines lead to what we already
see. I think like Claude Code for building a
website, you can stand up a beautiful
website in a few hours or do data
going to keep getting better, and
we'll pick up some new coding skills
along the way. Linking to
what's happening in big tech,
this AI 2027 report leans into the
singularity idea, whereas
I think research is messy,
social and largely in the data
in ways that AI models can't
process. But what we do have today
is really powerful and these
tech companies are all collectively buying
into this with tens of billions of dollars of
investment. So we are going to
get some much better version
of ChatGPT, a much better version of
Claude Code than we already have.
I think it's just hard to predict
where that is going, but the
bright clarity of that future is why some of
the most powerful people in the world are
putting so much money into this.
And I think it's just kind of
small differences between like—we don't
actually know what a better version of
ChatGPT is, but also, can it automate AI
research? I would say probably not, at
least in this timeframe. Big tech
is going to spend $100 billion much
faster than we get an automated AI researcher
that enables an AI research singularity.
- So you think your prediction
would be— if this is
even a useful milestone or
more than 10 years out?
- I would say less than that on the software
side, but I think longer than that on
things like research.
- Well, let's just for fun try to imagine
a world where all software writing
is fully automated. Can
you imagine that world?
- By the end of this year, the amount of
software that'll be automated will be so
high. But it'll be things like
trying to train a model with
RL and you need to have
multiple bunches of GPUs
communicating with each other. That'll
still be hard, but it'll be much easier.
- One way to think about this—
the full automation of
programming—is just thinking of lines
of useful code written, the fraction of
that to the number of humans in the
loop. So presumably there'll be
for a long time humans in the loop of
software writing. It'll just be fewer and
fewer relative to the amount
of code written. Right?
And the superhuman coder—I think
the presumption there is it
goes to zero, the number of humans
in the loop. What does that world
look like when the number of
humans in the loop is in the
hundreds, not in the
hundreds of thousands?
- I think software engineering will
be driven more to system design
and goals of outcomes, where I do
think software is largely going to
be. I think this has been happening
over the last few weeks, where people
have gone from a month ago saying, "Oh
yeah, agents are kind of slop," which
is a famous Karpathy quote, to
what is a little bit of a meme—the
industrialization of software when anyone
can just create software with their
fingerprints. I do think we are closer
to that side of things, and it takes
direction and understanding
how systems work
to extract the best from the language
models. I think it's hard to accept the
gravity of how much is going to change
with software development and how many
more people can do things without
ever looking at the code.
- I think what's interesting is to think
about whether these systems will be
independent—completely independent in
the sense that, while I have no doubt
that LLMs will kind of at some
point solve coding in a sense,
like calculators solve calculating,
right? So at some point, humans
developed a tool where you never need
a human to calculate that number.
You just type it in, and it's
an algorithm. You can do it in
that sense. And I think that's
the same probably for coding. But
the question isn't... I think what will happen
is, you will just say, "Build that website."
It will make a really good website, and
then you maybe refine it. But will it
do things independently where... Will
you still be having humans asking
the AI to do something? Like will
there be a person to say, "Build that
website?" Or will there be AI that
just builds websites or something?
- I think talking about
building websites is—
- Too simple.
- The problem with websites and
the problem with the web,
you know, HTML and all that kind of stuff,
it's very resilient to just ... slop.
It will show you slop; it's good
at showing slop. I would rather
think of safety-critical systems,
like asking AI to end-to-end generate
something that manages
logistics, or manages cars,
a fleet of cars—all that kind of stuff.
So it end-to-end generates that for you.
- I think a more intermediate example is
take something like Slack or Microsoft
Word. I think if organizations
allow it, AI could very easily
implement features end-to-end and
do a fairly good job for like
things that you want to try.
You want to add a new tab in
Slack that you want to use, and I think
AI will be able to do that pretty well.
- Actually, that's a really great
example. How far away are we from that?
- Like this year.
- See, I don't know. I don't know.
- I guess I don't know how bad production
codebases are, but I think that
within... on the order of a few years, a
lot of people are going to be pushed to
be more of a designer and product
manager, where you have multiple of these
agents that can try things for you and they
might take one to two days to implement
a feature or attempt to fix a bug.
And you have these dashboards,
which I think Slack is actually a good dashboard
where your agents will talk to you and
you'll then give feedback.
But things like,
if I make a website, like, "Do you
want a passable logo?" I think these
cohesive design things and the
style is going to be very hard
for models and deciding on
what to add the next time.
- I just... Okay. I hang out with a
lot of programmers and some of them
are a little bit on the skeptical side
in general. That's just their vibe. I
just think there's a lot of complexity
involved in adding features to complex
systems. Like, if you look
at the browser, Chrome.
If I wanted to add a feature,
if I wanted to have tabs
as opposed to up top, I
want them on the left side.
Interface-wise, right? I think we're
not... This is not a next-year thing.
- One of the Claude releases this year, one
of their tests was: we give it a piece of
software and leave Claude to run to
recreate it entirely, and it could already
almost rebuild Slack from
scratch, just given the
parameters of the software and left
in a sandbox environment to do that.
- So the "from scratch" part,
I like almost better.
- So it might be that smaller and newer
companies are advantaged, and they're like,
"We don't have the bloat and complexity,
and therefore this feature exists."
- And I think this gets to the point you
mentioned, that some people you talk
to are skeptical. I think that's
not because the LLM can't do
X, Y, Z. It's because people
don't want it to do it this way.
- Some of that could be a skill issue
on the human side. We have to be
honest with ourselves. And some of that
could be an underspecification issue.
So, programming, it's like you're
just assuming... This is like an
issue with communication in relationships
and friendships. You're assuming the
LLM is supposed to read your mind.
This is where spec-driven design is
really important. Using natural
language to specify what you want.
- If you talk to people at the labs,
they use these in their training
and production code. Claude Code is
built with Claude Code, and they all
use these things extensively. Dario
talks about how much of Claude's
code... It's like these people are slightly
ahead in terms of the capabilities
they have and what they
probably spend on inference.
They could spend 10 to 100x as
much as we're spending on a lowly
$100 or $200 a month plan. They
truly let it rip. And I think that,
with the pace of progress
that we have, it seems like-
a year ago we didn't have Claude Code
and we didn't really have reasoning
models. The difference between sitting
here today and what we can do with these
models is significant,
and there's a lot of
low-hanging fruit to improve them. The
failure modes are pretty dumb. Like-
"Claude, you tried to use a CLI command I
don't have installed 14 times, and then
I sent you the command to run."
That, from a modeling perspective,
is pretty fixable. So I don't know.
- I agree with you. I've been
becoming more and more bullish in
general. Speaking to what you're
articulating, I think it is a
human skill issue.
Anthropic is leading the
way, along with other
companies, in understanding
how to best use the models for programming;
therefore, they're effectively
using them. There are a lot of
programmers on the outskirts who
don't... I mean, there's not a really good
guide on how to use them. People
are trying to figure it out, but-
- It might be very expensive. The
entry point might be $2,000 a
month, which is only for tech companies
and rich people. That could be it.
- But it might be worth it. If
the final result is a working
software system, it might be worth it. By
the way, it's funny how we converged from
the discussion of timeline to AGI
to something more pragmatic and
useful. Is there anything
concrete, interesting,
useful, and profound to be said
about the timeline to AGI and
ASI? Or are these discussions a bit
too detached from the day to day?
- There are interesting bets. A lot
of people are trying to do RLVR—
Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable
Rewards—in real scientific domains,
where startups with hundreds of millions
of funding have wet labs where they're
having language models propose
hypotheses that are tested in the real
world. I would say that they're early,
but with the pace of progress, it's like-
...maybe they're early by six months
and they make it because they
were there first, or maybe they're
early by eight years; you don't know.
That type of moonshot to branch
this momentum into other sciences
would be very transformative. If,
AlphaFold moments happen in all
sorts of other scientific domains
by a startup solving this. I think
there are startups—maybe Harmonic is
one—where they're going all in
on language models plus Lean for
math. You had another guest where
you talked about this recently, and
we don't know exactly
what's going to fall out of
spending $100 million on that
model. Most of them will
fail, but a couple might be big
breakthroughs that are very
different than ChatGPT or
Claude Code type software
experiences. A tool that's only good for a
PhD mathematician but makes
them 100X effective...
- I agree. I think this will happen
in a lot of domains, especially
domains that have a lot of resources,
like finance, legal, and
pharmaceutical companies.
But then again, is it really
AGI? Because we are now
specializing it again. Is it really
that much different from back
in the day when we had specialized
algorithms? It's just the same thing,
way more sophisticated, but I don't know,
is there a threshold for AGI? I think
the real cool thing here is that
we have foundation models we
can specialize. That's like the
breakthrough. Right now, I think we
are not there yet because, first,
it's too expensive, but also,
ChatGPT doesn't just give away their
model to customize it. I think
once that's true... And I can
imagine this as a business model,
where OpenAI says at some point,
"Hey, Bank of America, for $100
million we will do your custom model,"
something like that. I think
that will be the huge economic
value-add. The other thing, though, is
also... Companies, I mean,
what is the differentiating
factor? If everyone uses the
same LLM, if everyone uses
ChatGPT, they will all do
the same thing. Well, if
everyone is moving in lockstep,
but companies want to have a
competitive advantage, there is
no way around using some of their
private data and specializing.
It's gonna be interesting.
- Seeing the pace of progress, it does
feel like things are coming. I don't
think the AGI and ASI thresholds
are particularly useful.
- I think the real question, and
this relates to the remote worker
thing, is: when are we going to see a
big, obvious leap in economic impact?
Because currently there's
not been an obvious leap in
the economic impact of
LLM models, for example.
And that's, you know, aside
from AGI or ASI, all that
stuff, there's a real question of, "When
are we going to see a GDP..." "...jump?"
- Yeah, what is the GDP made up
of? A lot of it is financial
services, so I don't know what this is.
- Right, GDP is a-
- It's just hard for me to
think about the GDP bump, but
I would say that software development
becomes valuable in a different
way, when you no longer have
to look at the code anymore.
When Claude Code will make
you a small business.
Which is essentially, Claude can set up your
website, your bank account, your email, and your
whatever else. And you just have
to express what you're trying
to put into the world. That's not just an
enterprise market, but it is hard. I don't
know how you get people to try doing
that. I guess if ChatGPT can do
it—people are trying ChatGPT.
- I think it boils down to the scientific
question of, "How hard is tool use
to solve?" Because a lot of
the stuff you're implying,
the remote work stuff, is tool
use. It's like... computer
use, like how you have an
LLM that goes out there,
this agentic system, and does
something in the world, and
only screws up 1% of the time.
- Computer use-
- Or less.
- ...is a good example of what labs care about
and we haven't seen a lot of progress on.
We saw multiple demos in 2025 of, like,
Claude can use your computer, or OpenAI
had operator, and they all suck.
They're investing money in this,
and I think that'll be a good
example. Whereas actually,
something where it just seems
like taking over the whole
screen seems a lot harder
than having an API that they
can call in the back end.
For some of that, you have to set up a different
environment for them all to work in. They're
not working on your MacBook; they
are individually interfacing with
Google and Amazon and Slack, and they
handle all these things in a very
different way than humans do. So some
of this might be structural blockers.
- Also, specification-wise,
I think the problem is
for arbitrary tasks, well, you
still have to specify what you
want your LLM to do. And how
do you do that? What is the
environment? How do you specify? You
can say what the end goal is, but
if it can't solve the end goal...
with LLMs, if you ask it for text, it
can always clarify or do
sub-steps. How do you put that
information into a system that, let's say,
books a travel trip for you? You can say,
"You screwed up my credit card information,"
but even to get it to that point,
even to get it to that point,
how do you, as a user, guide the
model before it can even attempt that?
I think the interface is really hard.
- Yeah, it has to learn a lot
about you specifically.
And this goes to continual learning,
about the general mistakes
that are made throughout, and then
mistakes that are made through you.
- All the AI interfaces are getting
set up to ask humans for input.
I think Claude Code we talked about a lot.
It asks feedback and questions. If
it doesn't have enough specification
on your plan or your desired goal, it starts
to ask questions, "Would you rather?"
We talked about Memory,
which saves across chats.
Its first implementation is kind
of odd, where it'll mention my
dog's name or something in a chat.
I'm like, "You don't need to be
subtle about this. I don't care."
But things that are emerging,
ChatGPT has the Pulse feature.
Which is like a curated
couple of paragraphs with
links to something to look at,
and people talk about how models
are going to ask you
questions. Which I think is a
very... It's probably going to
work. The language model knows
you had a doctor appointment and asks,
"Hey, how are you feeling after that?"
Which again goes into the territory
where humans are very susceptible
to this, and there's a lot of
social change to come. But also,
they're experimenting with having the
models engage. Some people like this
Pulse feature, which processes your
chats and automatically searches
for information and puts it in the app.
So there are a lot of things coming.
- I used that feature before, and I
always feel bad because it does
that every day, and I rarely check
it out. It's like, how much compute
is burned on something I don't even look
at, you know? It's kind of like, "Oh..."
- There's also a lot of idle compute
in the world, so don't feel too bad.
- Okay. Do you think new
ideas might be needed?
Is it possible that the path to
AGI, however we define that,
to solve computer use more generally,
to solve biology and chemistry
and physics—sort of the Dario Amodei
definition of AGI? Do you think it's
possible that totally new ideas
are needed? Non-LLM, non-RL ideas?
What might they look like? We're
going into philosophy land a bit.
- For something like a singularity
to happen, I would say yes.
The new ideas could be architectures
or training algorithms,
fundamental deep learning
things. But in that nature,
they're pretty hard to predict.
I think we won't get very
far even without those advances.
We might get the software
solution, but it might stop at
software and not do computer use
without more innovation. So I think
that a lot of progress will be
coming, but if you're gonna zoom
out, there's still ideas in the
next 30 years that are
gonna look like that was a
major scientific innovation
that enabled the
next chapter of this. And I don't know
if it comes in one year or in 15 years.
- Yeah. I wonder if the bitter lesson holds
true for the next 100 years, what that looks
like.
- If scaling laws are fundamental in deep
learning, I think the bitter lesson
will always apply, which is
compute will become more
abundant, but even within
abundant compute, the ones
that have a steeper scaling
law slope or a better offset—
like, this is a 2D plot of
performance and compute—and like
even if there's more compute available,
the ones that get 100x out of it will win.
- It might be something like literally
computer clusters orbiting Earth
with solar panels.
- The problem with that is heat dissipation.
You get all the radiation from the sun
and don't have any air to dissipate heat.
But there is a lot of space to put clusters.
There's a lot of solar energy there and
you could figure out the heat dissipation,
as there is a lot of energy and there
probably could be engineering will to solve
the heat problem— so there could be.
- Is it possible—and we should say
that it definitely is possible—
that we're basically going to be
plateauing this year? Not in terms of—
the system capabilities, but
what they actually mean for
human civilization. So on the coding
front, really nice websites will be built.
Very nice auto-complete.
Very nice way to understand code bases
and maybe help debug, but really just a
very nice helper on the coding
front. It can help research
mathematicians do some
math. It can help you with
shopping. It's a nice
helper. It's Clippy on
steroids. What else? It may be a good
education tool and all that kind of stuff,
but computer use turns out
extremely difficult to
solve. So I'm trying to frame the cynical
case in all these domains
where there's not a really
huge economic impact, but realize
how costly it is to train these
systems at every level, both the
pre-training and the inference,
how costly the inference is,
the reasoning, all of that.
Like, is that possible? And how
likely is that, do you think?
- When you look at the models, there are
so many obvious things to improve and
it takes a long time to train
these models and to do this art,
and it'll take us with the ideas
that we have multiple years
to actually saturate in terms
of whatever benchmark or
performance we are searching
for. It might serve very narrow
niches; like the average
ChatGPT 800 million user might
not get a lot of benefit out of this,
but it is going to serve different
populations by getting
better at different things.
- But I think what everybody's
chasing now is a
general system that's useful
to everybody. So, okay, so if
that's not... That can plateau, right?
- I think that dream is actually kind of
dying. As you talked about with the
specialized models where it's like...
And multimodal is often... Video generation
is a totally different thing. Thing.
- "That dream is kind of
dying" is a big statement,
because I don't know if it's dying.
If you ask the actual frontier
lab people, they... I mean,
they're still chasing it, right?
- I do think they are still rushing
to get the next model out,
which will be much better than the...
"Much" is a relative term, but it will
be better than the previous one.
And I can't see them slowing down.
I just think the gains
will be made or felt more
through not only scaling the model, but
now... I feel like there's a lot of tech
debt. It's like, "Well, let's just put the
better model in there."
Better model, better model. And now
people are like, "Okay, let's also
at the same time improve
everything around it too."
Like the engineering of the
context and inference scaling.
The big labs will still keep
doing that. And now also the
smaller labs will catch up,
because now they are hiring more.
There will be more people and
LLMs. It's kind of like a circle.
They also make them more productive and
it's just... It's like amplification.
I think what we can expect is
amplification, but not like a change
of any... not like a paradigm change.
I don't think that is true, but
everything will be just amplified
and amplified, and I can see that
continuing for a long time, you know?
- Yeah. I guess my statement that the
dream is dying depends on exactly
what you think it's gonna be doing.
Like, Claude Code is a general model
that can do a lot of things,
but it's not necessarily...
It depends a lot on integrations. I bet
Claude Code could do a fairly good job
of doing your email, and the hardest part
is figuring out how to give information
to it and how to get it to
be able to send your emails.
But that's just kind of like... I
think it goes back to what is the
"one model to rule everything" ethos,
which is just like a thing in the
cloud that handles your entire digital
life and is way smarter than everybody.
It's like it's operating in a...
So it's an interesting leap of faith
to go from "Claude Code becomes that,"
which in some ways is... There are some
avenues for that, but I do think that the
rhetoric of the industry
is a little bit different.
- I think the immediate thing
we will feel next as a normal
person using LLMs will probably
be related to something
trivial, like making figures.
Right now, LLMs are terrible at
making figures. Is it because we
are getting served the cheap models
with much less inference compute
than behind the scenes? Maybe some.
Like, there are some ways to get
better figures, but if you ask today,
..."Draw a flowchart of X, Y, Z,"
it's most of the time terrible.
And it is a very simple task for
a human. I think it's almost
easier sometimes to draw something
than to write something.
- Yeah, the multimodal understanding does
feel like something that is odd...
...that it's not better solved.
- I think we're not saying one obvious
thing that we're not realizing,
that's a gigantic thing that's hard
to measure, which is making all of
human knowledge accessible—
—to the entire world.
One thing that is hard to articulate
is the huge difference between
Google Search and an LLM. I
feel like I can basically
ask an LLM anything and get an answer, and
it's doing less and less hallucination.
And that means understanding my own life,
figuring out a career trajectory,
solving the problems all around me,
learning about anything
through human history.
I feel like nobody's
really talking about that,
because they just immediately take
it for granted that this is awesome.
That's why everybody's using it:
because you get answers for stuff.
Think about the impact across time.
This is not just in the United
States; it's all across the world.
Kids throughout the world being
able to learn these ideas—
the impact that has across time is
probably... ...That's the real impact.
Talk about GDP; it won't be
like a leap. It'll be...
...that's how we get to Mars,
that's how we build these things,
that's how we have a million new OpenAIs
and all the innovation from there.
It's this quiet force that permeates
everything: human knowledge.
- I agree with you. In a sense, it
makes knowledge more accessible,
but it also depends on what the topic is.
For something like math, you can
ask it questions and it answers,
but if you want to learn a topic from
scratch, the sweet spot is still elsewhere.
There are really good math
textbooks laid out linearly,
and that is a proven
strategy to learn a topic.
It makes sense, if you start from zero,
to use information-dense
text to soak it up,
but then you use the LLM to
make infinite exercises. Like,
you have problems in a certain area
or have questions that something's-
uncertain about certain
things, you ask it to
generate example problems, you solve them,
and you need more background
knowledge, you ask it to generate
that. But then... it won't
give you anything, let's
say, that is not in the textbook.
It's just packaging it differently,
if that makes sense.
But then there are things I feel
like where it also adds value in a
more timely sense, where there is no good
alternative besides a human doing
it on the fly. For example, if
you're planning to go to
Disneyland and you try to
figure out which tickets to
buy for which park when, well,
there is no textbook on that. There
is no information-dense resource.
There's only the sparse internet, and
then there is a lot of value in the
LLM. You just ask it. You have
constraints on traveling these days.
I want to go there and there. Please
figure out what I need, when and
from where, what it costs and
stuff like that, and it is a very
customized, on-the-fly package.
And this is like one of a thousand
examples of personalized-
Personalization is essentially pulling
information from the sparse internet, the
non-information-dense thing where
there's no better version that exists.
It just doesn't exist. You make it
almost from scratch.
- And if it does exist, it's full of-
speaking of Disney World, full of-
what would you call it? Ad slop. It's
impossible. Take any city in the world,
what are the top 10 things to do?
An LLM is just way better to ask
than anything on the internet.
- Well, for now, that's because they're
subsidized and they're gonna be paid for
by ads.
- Oh my goodness.
- It's coming.
- No. No. I mean, I'm hoping there's a
very clear indication what's an ad
and what's not an ad in that context.
- That's something I mentioned a
few years ago. If, I don't know,
if you are looking for a new
running shoe, well, is it a
coincidence that Nike maybe comes
up first? Maybe, maybe not.
But I think there are clear laws.
You have to be clear about that.
I think that's what everyone fears.
It's the subtle message in there,
but that also brings us
to the topic of ads,
where I think this was a
thing. Hopefully, I think for-
in 2025, just because I think it's
they're still not making money
in other ways right now.
Having ad spots in there... but
the thing is, they couldn't,
because there are alternatives without
ads and people would just flock-
to the other products.
It's also just crazy how-
yeah, how they're one-upping
each other, spending
so much money to just get the users.
- I think so. Like, some Instagram
ads— I don't use Instagram,
but I understand the appeal of paying
a platform to find users who will
genuinely like your product, and that is
the best case of things like Instagram ads.
But there are also plenty of cases
where advertising is very awful for
incentives, and I think that a world where
the power of AI can integrate with that
positive view of, "I am a person and
I have a small business and I
want to make the best, I don't
know, damn steak knives in the world,
and I want to sell them to somebody
who needs them." And if AI can make
that sort of advertising thing
work even better, that's very good
for the world, especially with
digital infrastructure, because
that's how the modern web has been
built. But that's not to say that
addicting feeds so that you
can show people more content
is a good thing. So, I think that's even
what OpenAI would say, is they want to
find a way that can make
the monetization upside of
ads while still giving their users agency.
And I personally would think that Google is
probably going to be better at figuring out
how to do this, because
they already have ad supply
and if they figure out how to turn
this demand in their Gemini app into
useful ads, then they can turn it on. And
somebody will figure it out—I don't know
if it's this year, but there will be
experiments with it.
- I do think what holds companies back
right now is really just that the
competition is not doing it. It's
more like a reputation thing.
It's just, I think people are just
afraid right now of ruining or
losing their reputation, losing users,
because it would make headlines if
someone launched these ads. But—
- Unless they were great, but the first ads
won't be great because it's a hard problem
that we don't know how to solve.
- Yeah, I think also the first version of
that will likely be something like on X,
like the timeline where you have a
promoted post sometimes in between.
It'll be something where it will say "promoted"
or something small, and then there will be an
image. I think right now the problem
is: who makes the first move?
- If we go 10 years out, the
proposition for ads is that
you will make so much money on
ads by having so many users
that you can use this to fund better R&D
and make better models, which is why
YouTube is dominating the market for any—
Netflix is scared of
YouTube. They have the ads,
they make—I pay $28 a month for
Premium. They make at least $28 a month
off of me and many other people.
And they're just creating
such a dominant position in video. So
I think that's the proposition: that
ads can make you have
a sustained advantage.
in what you're spending per
user. But there's so much
money in it right now that
somebody starting that flywheel
is scary because it's a long-term bet.
- Do you think there'll be some
crazy big moves this year
business-wise? Like Google or Apple
acquiring Anthropic or something like this?
- Dario will never sell, but we are
starting to see some types of
consolidation with Groq for $20 billion
and Scale AI for almost
$30 billion and countless
other deals like this that are
structured in a way that is
detrimental to the Silicon
Valley ecosystem, which is this
licensing deal where not
everybody gets brought along,
rather than a full acquisition that
benefits the rank-and-file employee
by getting their stock vested.
That's a big issue for culture to
address because the startup
ecosystem is the lifeblood where,
if you join a startup, even if it's not
successful, it might get acquired on a
cheap premium and you'll get
paid out for this equity.
These licensing deals are taking
the top talent a lot of the time.
The deal for Groq to
NVIDIA is rumored to be
better to the employees, but it is
still this antitrust-avoiding thing.
But I think that this trend of
consolidation will continue.
Me and many smart people I
respect have been expecting
consolidation to have
happened sooner, but it seems
like some of these things
are starting to turn,
but at the same time, companies are
raising ridiculous amounts of money for
reasons where I'm like, "I don't
know why you're taking that money."
So it's mixed this year, but some
consolidation pressure is starting.
- What kind of surprising consolidation
will we see? You say Anthropic
is a "never." I mean, Groq is a big
one. Groq with a Q, by the way.
- Yeah. There's just a lot of startups
and a very high premium on AI startups.
So there could be a lot of
- that kind of stuff, yeah.
- $10 billion range acquisitions, which
is really big for a startup that was
maybe founded a year ago. I think
Manus.ai... this company based in
Singapore that Meta-founded was
founded eight months ago and then had
a $2 billion exit. I think there will
be some other multi-billion dollar
acquisitions, like Perplexity.
- Like Perplexity, right?
- Yeah, people rumor them to
Apple. I think there's a lot of
of pressure and liquidity
in AI. There's pressure on
big companies to have outcomes and-
I would guess that a big
acquisition gives people leeway
to then tell the next
chapter of that story.
- I guess Cursor—we've been talking
about code—somebody acquires Cursor.
if somebody acquires Cursor...
- They're in such a good position
by having so much user data.
And we talked about continual learning. They
had one of the most interesting sentences
in a blog post, which is that they had
their new Composer model, which was
a fine-tune of one of these large Mixture
of Expert models from China. You can
know that by asking it or because the
model sometimes responds in Chinese—
...which none of the American models do. And
they had a blog post where they're like,
"We're updating the model weights every
90 minutes based on real-world feedback
from people using it." Which is like
the closest thing to real-world RL
happening on a model, and it's just
mentioned in one of their blog posts—
- That's incredible.
- which is super cool.
- And by the way, I should say I use Composer
a lot because one of the benefits it
has is that it's fast.
- I need to try it 'cause
everybody says this.
- And there'll be some IPOs potentially.
You think Anthropic, OpenAI, xAI.
- They can all raise so much money
so easily that they don't feel a need to.
So long as fundraising is easy, they're not
going to IPO because public
markets apply pressure.
I think we're seeing in China that the
ecosystem's a little different with both
MiniMax and Z.ai applying for,
filing IPO paperwork, which will be interesting
to see how the Chinese market reacts.
I actually would guess that it's
going to be similarly hypey to
the US, so long as all this is going and
not based on the reality that they're both
losing a ton of money. I wish
more of the gigantic American
AI startups were public because it would be very
interesting to see how they're spending money
and have more insight. And
also just to give people
access to investing in these, because
I think they're some of the most
formidable companies—they're the
companies of the era. And the
tradition is now for so many of the
big startups in the US to not go public.
It's like we're still waiting for Stripe and
the IPO, but Databricks definitely
didn't. They raised like a Series G
or something. And I just feel
like it's kind of a weird
equilibrium for the
market where it's like,
I would like to see these
companies go public and
evolve in that way that a company can.
- Do you think 10 years from now some
of the frontier model companies are
still around? Anthropic, OpenAI?
- I definitely don't see it as a
winner-takes-all unless there truly
is some algorithmic secret that
one of them finds that lets this
flywheel. Because the development path
is so similar for all of them. Google
and OpenAI have all the same
products, and then Anthropic's more
focused, but when you talk to people it
sounds like they're solving a lot of the same
problems. So I think... and there's
offerings that'll spread out. There's a lot
of... it's a very big cake being made that
people are going to take money out of.
- I don't want to trivialize it, but OpenAI
and Anthropic are primarily LLM service
providers. And some of the
other companies like Google and
xAI, linked to X, do other stuff
too. And so it's very possible,
if AI becomes more commodified,
that the companies just
providing LLMs will die.
- I think the advantage they have is a
lot of users, and I think they will
just pivot. Like Anthropic, I
think, pivoted. I don't think they
originally planned to work on
code, but they found, "Okay, this
is a nice niche, and now we are comfortable
and we push on this niche." I can see
the same thing... Let's say
hypothetically, I'm not sure
if it will be true, but let's say Google
takes all the market share of the general
chatbot. Maybe OpenAI will then
focus on some other sub-topic.
They have too many users to go
away in the foreseeable future.
- I think Google is always ready to
say, "Hold my beer," with AI models.
- I think the question is if
the companies can support the
valuations. I see the AI companies being
looked at in some ways like
AWS, Azure, and GCP are,
all competing in the same space and all
very successful businesses. There's a
chance that the API market is
so unprofitable that they go
up and down the stack to products and hardware.
They have so much cash that they can build
power plants and data centers, which is
a durable advantage now. But there's
also a reasonable outcome that
these APIs are so valuable and
so flexible for developers that
they become something like
AWS. But AWS and Azure are also
going to have these APIs, so
having five or six people competing in the
API market is hard. So maybe that's why
they get squeezed out.
- You mentioned "RIP Llama." Is
there a path to winning for Meta?
- I think nobody knows. They're moving a
lot, so they're signing licensing deals
with Black Forest Labs, which
is an image generation company,
or Midjourney. So I think in some ways
on the product and consumer-facing
AI front, it's too
early to tell. I think they have
some people who are excellent
and very motivated being close to
Zuckerberg. So I think there's still a
story to unfold there. Llama is a
bit different, where Llama was the
most focused expression of the
organization. And I don't see Llama
being supported to that extent.
I think it was a very successful
brand for them. So they still
might participate in the
open ecosystem or continue the
Llama brand into a different
service, because people
know what Llama is.
- You think there's a Llama 5?
- Not an open-weight one.
- It's interesting. I think Llama was the
pioneering open-weight model. With Llama 1,
2, and 3, there was a lot
of love. But I think then,
hypothesizing or speculating,
I think the leaders
at Meta, like the upper executives,
they... I think they got
very excited about Llama because they saw how
popular it was in the community. And then
I think the problem was trying to,
let's say, monetize the open—or not
monetize the open source,
but use it to make a bigger
splash. It felt almost forced, like
developing these very big Llama 4 models
to be on top of the
benchmarks. But I don't think the
goal of Llama models is to be on top
of the benchmarks beating, let's say, ChatGPT
or other models. I think the goal was to
have a model that people can use,
trust, modify, and understand.
So that includes having smaller models.
They don't have to be the best models.
And what happened was, these models
were, of course... the benchmarks
suggested that they were better than
they were because they had specific
models trained on preferences so that they
performed well on benchmarks. That's kind of,
like, this overfitting thing to force
it to be the best. But then at the same
time, they didn't do the small models
that people could use. And I think
that no one could run these big models
then. And then there was kind of a
weird thing. I think it's just
because people got too excited
about headlines pushing the
frontier. I think that's it.
- And too much on the benchmarking side.
- It's too much work.
- I think it imploded under internal
political fighting and misaligned
incentives. The researchers want to
build the best models, but
there's a layer of organization—
...and management that is trying to demonstrate
that they do these things. And then
there are rumors about how, for example,
some horrible technical decision was made.
It just seems like it got so bad
that it all just crashed out.
- Yeah, but we should also
give huge props to Mark
Zuckerberg. I think it comes
from Mark, actually, from
Mark Zuckerberg, from the top of the
leadership, saying open source is
important. The fact that
that leadership exists
means there could be a Llama 5,
where they learn the lessons from
benchmarking and say, "We're
going to be GPT-OSS—"
"...and provide a really awesome
library of open source."
- What people say is that there's
a debate between Mark and
Alexandr Wang, who is very bright,
but much more against open
source. And to the extent that he has
a lot of influence over the AI org, it
seems much less likely, because it
seems like Mark brought him in for a
fresh leadership eye in directing AI. And
if being open or closed is no longer
the defining nature of the model, I
don't expect that to be a defining
argument between Mark and
Alex. They're both very bright,
but I just have a hard time
understanding all of it because
Mark wrote this piece in July of
2024, which was probably the best
blog post at the time, saying
"The Case for Open Source AI."
And then July 2025 came around and it was,
"We're reevaluating our relationship with
open source." So it's just kind of...
- But I think also the problem...
Not the problem, but I think,
well, we may have been a bit too
harsh, and that caused some of that.
Because I mean, we as open source
developers or the community...
Even though the model was
maybe not what everyone hoped
for, it got a lot of backlash.
And I think that was unfortunate
because I can see that as a
company, they were hoping for
positive headlines. And
instead of just getting
no headlines or positive headlines,
in turn they got negative
headlines. And then it kind of
reflected bad on the company.
I think that is also something
where it's maybe a spite reaction,
almost like, "Okay, we tried to
do something nice, we tried to
give you something cool, like an
open source model, and now you are
kind of being negative about
us, even for the company."
So in that sense, it looks like, "Well,
maybe then we'll change our mind."
I guess. I don't know.
- Yeah, that's where the
dynamics of discourse on
X can lead us, as a community, astray.
Because sometimes it feels random. People
pick the thing they like and don't
like. I mean, you can see the same thing
with Grok 4.1 and Grok Code Fast 1.0.
I don't think, vibe-wise, people love it
publicly. But a lot of people use it.
So if you look to Reddit and
X, they don't really give it
praise from the programming
community, but they use it.
And the same thing with probably Llama.
I don't understand the dynamics of
either positive hype or negative
hype. I don't understand it.
- I mean, one of the stories of 2025
is the US filling the gap of Llama,
which is the rise of these Chinese
open-weight models, models-
to the point where that was the single
issue I've spent a lot of energy on lately,
trying to do policy work to
get the US to invest in this.
- So just tell me the story of ADAM.
- The ADAM Project started as me
calling it the American DeepSeek
Project, which doesn't really work for
DC audiences, but it's the story of
the most impactful thing I can
do with my career, which is
that these Chinese open-weight models
are cultivating a lot of power,
and there is a lot of demand for
building on these open models,
especially in enterprises in the US that
are very cagey about Chinese models.
- The ADAM Project, American Truly
Open Models, is a US-based initiative
to build and host high-quality,
genuinely open-weight AI models
and supporting infrastructure
explicitly aimed at competing
with and catching up to
China's rapidly advancing
open-source AI ecosystem.
- I think the one-sentence summary
would be that... or two sentences.
One is a proposition that open models
are going to be an engine for AI
research because that is what people
start with; therefore, it's important to
own them. And the second
one is, therefore, the US
should be building the best models so
that the best research happens in the
US, and those US companies
take the value from being the
home of where AI research is
happening. And without more
investment in open models—we have plots
on the website where it's like, "Qwen,
Qwen, Qwen, Qwen"—it's
all these models that are
excellent from these Chinese companies
that are cultivating influence
internationally. I think the US is
spending way more on AI, and the
ability to create open models that
are a generation beyond what
the cutting edge of closed labs
costs roughly $100 million,
which is a lot of money, but
not a lot of money to these
companies. Therefore, we need a
centralizing force of people who
want to do this. And I think
we got engagement from people pretty
much across the full stack, whether
it's policy.
- So there has been support
from the administration?
- I don't think anyone
technically in government has
signed it publicly, but I know
people that have worked in AI
policy, in both the Biden and Trump
administrations, are very supportive
of promoting open-source models
in the US. I think, for example,
AI2 got a grant from the NSF
for $100 million over four
years, which is the biggest CS grant the
NSF has ever awarded, and it's for AI2
to attempt this. It's a starting point.
But the best thing happens when there are
multiple organizations building models,
because they can cross-pollinate
ideas and build this ecosystem.
I don't think it works if it's
just Llama releasing models,
because Llama could go away.
The same thing applies for AI2;
I can't be the only one building models.
It becomes a lot of time spent on
talking to people, whether in
policy... I know NVIDIA is
very excited about this. I think Jensen
Huang has been talking about the urgency
for this, and they've done a
lot more in 2025, where the
Nemotron models are more of a focus.
They've started releasing some
data along with NVIDIA's
open models, and very few
companies do this, especially
of NVIDIA's size, so there
are signs of progress. We hear about
Reflection AI, where they say their
two billion dollar fundraise is dedicated
to building US open models, and I feel
and their announcement tweet
reads like a blog post, right?
I think that cultural tide is
starting to turn. In July,
four or five DeepSeek-caliber
Chinese open-weight models and
and zero from the US. That's
the moment where I realized,
like, "Oh, I guess I have to spend energy on
this because nobody else is gonna do it."
So it takes a lot of people contributing
together, and I don't say that,
the Adam Project isn't the thing that's
helping to move the ecosystem, but it's
people like me doing this sort
of thing to get the word out.
- Do you like the 2025 America's
AI Action Plan? That
includes open source stuff. The
White House AI Action Plan includes
a dedicated section titled "Encourage
Open-Source and Open-Weight
AI," defining such models and
arguing they have unique value for
innovation and startups.
- Yeah. I mean, the AI
Action Plan is a plan,
but largely, I think it's maybe the most
coherent policy document that has come
out of the administration, and I hope
that it largely succeeds. I know people
that have worked on the AI Action Plan and
the challenges of taking policy and
making it real. I have no idea how
to do this as an AI researcher,
but largely a lot of things in
that were very real, and there's
a huge build-out of AI in the
country. There are a lot of issues that
people are hearing about, from water use to
whatever, and we should be able to
build things in this country, but also,
we need to not ruin places in
our country in the process of
building it, and it's worthwhile
to spend energy on. I
think that's a role the federal
government plays. They set the agenda.
And with AI, setting the agenda
that open-weight should be a
first consideration is a large part of
what they can do and then
people think about it.
- Also, for education and talent
for these companies, it's very
important because otherwise,
if there are only closed
models, how do you get
the next generation of
people contributing at some point?
Because otherwise, you will
point only be able to learn after you
joined a company. But at
that point, how do you hire
talented people? How do you identify
talented people? I think open source
is essential for a lot of
things, but also even just for
educating the population and
training the next generation of
researchers. It's the
way, or the only way.
- The way that I could've gotten this
to go more viral was to tell a
story of Chinese AI integrating
with an authoritarian state,
being ASI and taking over the world, and therefore
we need our own American models. But it's very
intentional why I talk about
innovation and science in the US
because I think it's both more
realistic as an outcome, but also
it's a world that I
would like to manifest.
- I would say, though, also
even any open-weight
model, I do think, is a valuable model.
- Yeah. And my argument is that we should be
in a leading position. But I think it's
worth saying it simply because there
are still voices in the AI ecosystem
that say we should consider banning the
release of open models due to safety risks.
And I think it's worth adding
that, effectively, that's
impossible without making the US have
its own great firewall, which is
also known to not work that well because
the cost for training these models, whether
it's one to a hundred million dollars, is
attainable to a huge amount of people
in the world that want to have influence, so
these models will be trained all over the
world. And we want the models,
especially when, like,
I mean, there are safety concerns, but we
want this information and tools to flow
freely across the world and into the
US so that people can use them and
learn from them. Stopping that would be
such a restructuring of our internet
that it seems impossible.
- Do you think maybe in that case the
big open-weight models from China are
actually a good thing in a sense, like,
for the US companies? Because maybe
the US companies you mentioned earlier
are usually one generation behind
in terms of what they release open source
versus what they are using? For example,
gpt-oss might not be the cutting-edge
model. Gemini 3 might not
be, but they do that because they know this
is safe to release. But then when they
see, these companies see, for
example, there is DeepSeek-V3.2,
which is really awesome, and
it gets used and there is no
backlash, there is no security risk, that
could then, again, encourage them to
release better models. Maybe that, in
a sense, is a very positive thing.
- A hundred percent. These Chinese companies
have set things into motion that I
think would potentially not have happened
if they were not all releasing models.
So I think it was like I'm almost sure
that those discussions have been had
by leadership.
- Is there a possible future where
the dominant AI models in the
world are all open source?
- Depends on the trajectory of progress that
you predict. If you think saturation in
progress is coming within a
few years, so essentially,
within the time where financial support
is still very good, then open models
will be so optimized and so much cheaper
to run that they'll win out. This
goes back to open source ideas
where so many more people will be
putting money into optimizing
the serving of these
open-weight common architectures
that they will become standards, and
then you could have chips dedicated to
them, and it'll be way cheaper than
the offerings from these closed
companies that are custom.
- We should say that the AI27
report kinda predicts one
of the things it does from a narrative
perspective is that there will be a lot of
centralization. As the AI
systems get smarter and
smarter, national security
concerns will arise, and
you'll centralize the labs, and they'll
become super secretive, and there'll
be this whole race
- ...from a military perspective of how
do you... between China and the US.
And so all of these fun
conversations we're having about
LLMs... the generals and the soldiers will
come into the room and be like, "All
right. We're now in the Manhattan
Project stage of this whole thing."
- I think in 2025, '26, '27, I don't think
something like that is even remotely
possible. You can make the same argument
for computers, right? You can say,
"Computers are capable and we don't want
the general public to get them." Or chips,
even AI chips, but you see how Huawei
makes chips now. It took
a few years, but... and I
don't think there is a way you
can contain knowledge like that.
I think in this day and age, it is
impossible, like the internet. I
don't think this is a possibility.
- On the Manhattan Project
thing, I think that a
Manhattan Project-like thing for open
models would be pretty reasonable, because
it wouldn't cost that much.
But I think that will come.
It seems like culturally, the companies
are changing. But I agree with Sebastian
on all of that. I don't see it
happening nor being helpful.
- Yeah. The motivating force
behind the Manhattan Project was
civilizational risk. It's harder to
motivate that for open-source models.
- There's no civilizational risk.
- On the hardware side,
we mentioned NVIDIA a
bunch of times. Do you think Jensen
and NVIDIA will keep winning?
- I think they have to iterate
and manufacture a lot.
And I think they probably...
what they're doing,
they do innovate, but I think there's
always the chance that someone
does something fundamentally
different, gets very lucky, and
then does something. But the
problem is adoption. The moat of NVIDIA
is probably not just the GPU. It's
more like the CUDA ecosystem, and that
has evolved over two decades.
Even back when I was a
grad student, I was in a lab
doing biophysical simulations,
molecular dynamics, and we had a
Tesla GPU back then just for the
computations. It was about
15 years ago now. And
they built this up for a long time,
and that's the moat, I think.
It's not the chip itself,
although they have the
money to iterate, build, and
scale. But then it's really
about compatibility. If you're
at that scale, why would
you go with something risky where
there are only a few chips
they can make per year?
You go with the big one. But
then I do think with LLMs
now, it will be easier to
design something like CUDA.
It took 15 years because it was hard,
but now that we have LLMs, we can
maybe replicate CUDA.
- And I wonder if there will be a
separation of training and inference
compute as we stabilize, and more
compute is needed for inference.
- That's supposed to be the point of
the Groq acquisition. And that's why
part of what Vera Rubin is-
where they have a new chip with no
high-bandwidth memory, which is one of the-
or very little, which is one of
the most expensive pieces. It's
designed for pre-fill, which
is the part of inference
where you essentially do a lot of matrix
multiplications. And then you only need
the memory when you're doing this autoregressive
generation, and you have the KV cache
swaps. So they have this new GPU
that's designed for that specific
use case, and then the
cost of ownership per FLOP
or whatever is actually way
lower. But I think that
NVIDIA's fate lies in the diffusion
of AI still. Their biggest clients
are still these hyperscale
companies. Like, Google obviously
can make TPUs. Amazon is making Trainium.
Microsoft will try to do its own things.
And so long as the pace of AI progress is
high, NVIDIA's platform is the most
flexible and people will want that. But if
there's stagnation, then creating bespoke
chips, there's more time to do it.
- It's interesting that NVIDIA
is quite active in trying to
develop all kinds of different products.
- They try to create areas of commercial
value that will use a lot of GPUs.
- Mm-hmm. But they keep innovating
and they're doing a lot of
incredible research, so...
- Everyone says the company's super
oriented around Jensen and how
operationally plugged in he is. And
it sounds so unlike many other big
companies that I've heard about. And so
long as that's the culture, I think that
we can expect that to keep progress
happening. And it's like he's still in
the Steve Jobs era of Apple.
So long as that is how it
operates, I'm pretty optimistic for their
situation because it's like, it is
their top-order problem, and I don't
know if making these chips for the
whole ecosystem is the top goal of all
these other companies. They'll do a good
job, but it might not be as good of a job.
- Since you mentioned Jensen,
I've been reading a lot about
history and about singular figures in
history. What do you guys think about the
single man/woman view of
history? How important are
individuals for steering the direction
of history in the tech sector?
So, you know, what's NVIDIA
without Jensen? You mentioned
Steve Jobs. What's Apple
without Steve Jobs? What's xAI
without Elon or DeepMind without Demis?
- People make things earlier and
faster, whereas scientifically,
many great scientists credit being in the
right place at the right time and still making
the innovation, where eventually
someone else will still have the
idea. So I think that in that way, Jensen
is helping manifest this GPU revolution
much faster and much more
focused than it would happen
without having a person there. And this is
making the whole AI build-out faster. But I
do still think that eventually,
something like ChatGPT would have
happened and a build-out like this would have
happened, but it probably would not have
been as fast. I think that's the
sort of flavor that is applied.
- These individual people, there are people
who are placing bets on something.
Some get lucky, some don't. But if you don't
have these people at the helm, it would be more
diffused. It's almost like investing
in an ETF versus individual
stocks. Individual stocks
might go up or down more
heavily than an ETF, which is more balanced.
It will eventually go up over time. We'll
get there. But it's just
like, you know, the focus I
think is the thing. Passion and focus.
- Isn't there a real case to be made
that without Jensen, there's not a
reinvigoration of the
deep learning revolution?
- It could've been 20 years
later, is what I would say.
Or like another AI winter could
have come if GPUs weren't around.
- That could change history completely
because you could think of all the other
technologies that
could've come in the meantime, and the
focus of human civilization would get...
Silicon Valley would be
captured by different hype.
- But I do think there's certainly
an aspect where it was all
planned, the GPU trajectory. But on the
other hand, it's also a lot of lucky
coincidences or good
intuition. Like the investment
into, let's say, biophysical
simulations. I mean, I think it
started with video games and then it just
happened to be good at linear algebra
because video games require a lot of linear
algebra. And then you have the biophysical
simulations. But still, I
don't think the master plan
was AI. I think it happened to be Alex
Krizhevsky. So someone took
these GPUs and said, "Hey, let's
try to train a neural network on that."
It happened to work really well, and
I think it only happened because
you could purchase those GPUs.
- Gaming would've created a
demand for faster processors if
NVIDIA had gone out of
business in the early days.
That's what I would think. I think that
the GPUs would've been different,
but I think GPUs would still exist
at the time of AlexNet and at the time
of the Transformer. It was just hard to
know if it would be one company
as successful or multiple smaller
companies with worse chips.
But I don't think that's a
100-year delay. It might
be a decade delay.
- Well, it could be one, two, three,
four, five-decade delay. I just can't
see Intel or AMD doing what NVIDIA did.
- I don't think it would be
a company that exists.
I think it would be a different
company that would rise.
- Like Silicon Graphics or something.
- So yeah, some company that
has died would have done it.
- But just looking at it,
it seems like these
singular figures, these
leaders, have a huge impact
on the trajectory of the world. Obviously,
there are incredible teams behind them.
But, you know, having that kind of
very singular, almost dogmatic focus-
-is necessary to make progress.
- Yeah, I mean, even with GPT, it wouldn't
exist if there wasn't a person,
Ilya, who pushed for this scaling, right?
- Yeah, Dario Amodei was also
deeply involved in that.
If you read some of the histories from
OpenAI, it seems wild thinking about
how early these people were like, "We need
to hook up 10,000 GPUs and take all of
OpenAI's compute and train one model."
There were a lot of people who didn't want
to do that.
- Which is an insane thing to
believe. To believe in scaling
before scaling has any
indication that it's going to
materialize. Again, singular figures.
Speaking of which, 100 years from now, this
is presumably post-singularity,
whatever singularity is.
When historians look back
at our time now, what
technological breakthroughs
would they really
emphasize as the breakthroughs
that led to the singularity?
So far we have Turing to today, 80 years.
- I think it would still be computing,
like the umbrella term "computing."
I don't necessarily think that in 100
or 200 years it would be AI.
It could still very well be
computers. We are now taking
better advantage of them, but
the fact of computing remains.
- It's basically a Moore's
Law discussion. Even the
details of CUDA and GPUs
won't even be remembered, nor
will all this software turmoil.
It'll just be, obviously, compute.
- I generally agree, but is
the connectivity of the
internet and compute able to be
merged? Or is it both of them?
- I think the internet will probably
be related to communication.
It could be a phone, the
internet, or satellites.
Compute is more like the
scaling aspect of it.
- It's possible that the internet
is completely forgotten-
-that the internet is wrapped into phone
networks, like communication networks.
This is just another manifestation
of that, and the real breakthrough
comes from increased compute, or
Moore's Law, broadly defined.
- Well, I think the connection of
people is very fundamental to it.
it's like, you can talk to
anyone. You want to find the
best person in the world for something, they are
somewhere in the world. And being able to have
that flow of information—the
AIs will also rely on this.
I've been fixating on when I
said the dream was dead about
the one central model. The thing that is
evolving is people having many agents
for different tasks. People already
started doing this with different clouds.
It's described as many
AGIs in the data center
where each one manages and they
talk to each other. And that is
reliant on networking and the
free flow of information.
on top of compute. But
networking, especially with
GPUs, is such a part of
scaling of compute. The
GPUs and the data centers
need to talk to each other.
- Anything about neural networks will
be remembered? Like, do you think
there's something very specific and
singular to the fact that it's neural
networks that's seen as a breakthrough,
like a genius, that you're
basically replicating, in a very
crude way, the human mind? The
structure of the human
brain, the human mind?
- I think without the human mind,
we probably wouldn't have neural
networks, because it just was an
inspiration for that. But on the
other end, I think it's just so,
so different. I mean, it's digital
versus biological, that I do
think it will probably be more
grouped as an algorithm.
- That's massively parallelizable...
...On this particular kind of compute?
- It could have been like genetic
computing; genetic algorithms just
parallelized. It just happens that this
is more efficient and works better.
- And it very well could be that the
LLM, the neural networks, the way
we architect them now is just
a small component of the
system that leads to singularity.
- If you think of it in 100
years, I think society can be
changed more with more compute
and intelligence because of
autonomy. But looking
at this, what are the
things from the Industrial Revolution that we
remember? We remember the engine, which is
probably the equivalent
of the computer in this.
But there's a lot of other physical
transformations that people are aware
of, like the cotton gin and
all these things, these
machines that are still known:
air conditioning, refrigerators.
Some of these things from
AI will still be known.
The word "transformer" could still
be known. I would guess that deep
learning is definitely still known, but
the transformer might be evolved away
from in 100 years with AGI researchers
everywhere. But I think deep
learning is likely to be a
term that is remembered.
- And I wonder what the air conditioning and
refrigeration of the future is that AI brings.
If we travel forward 100 years from
now, we transport there right now,
what do you think is different? How do
you think the world looks different?
First of all, do you think there are
humans? Do you think there are robots
everywhere walking around?
- I do think specialized robots,
for sure, for certain tasks.
- Humanoid form?
- Maybe half-humanoid. We'll see.
I think for certain things, yes, there
will be humanoid robots because it's
just amenable for the environment.
But for certain tasks,
it might make sense. What's harder
to imagine is how we interact
with the devices and what humans
do with devices. Well, I mean,
I'm pretty sure it will probably
not be the cellphone or the laptop.
Will it be implants?
- I mean, it has to be
brain-computer interfaces, right?
I mean, 100 years from now, given
the progress we're seeing now—
there has to be... unless
there's legitimately a complete
alteration of how we
interact with reality.
- On the other hand, cars are
older than 100 years, right? And
it's still the same interface.
We haven't replaced cars with
something else. We just made them
better, but it's still a steering wheel,
still wheels, you know?
- I think we'll still carry around
a physical brick of compute
because people want some ability
to have a private... Like, you
might not engage with it as much as a
phone, but having private information
that is yours as an interface
between the rest of the
internet, I think that will
still exist. It might not
look like an iPhone and it might be
used a lot less, but I still expect
people to carry things around.
- Why do you think the smartphone
is the embodiment of private?
There's a camera on it. There's—
- Private for you, like encrypted
messages, encrypted photos...
know what your life is.
I guess it's a question of how optimistic
on brain-machine interfaces you are.
Is all that just going to be stored
in the cloud? Your whole calendar?
It's hard to think about processing
all the information that
we can process visually
through brain-machine interfaces
presenting something like a
calendar or something to you.
It's hard to just think about knowing,
without looking, your email inbox.
Like you signal to a computer and
then you just know your email inbox.
Is that something that the human
brain can handle being piped
into it non-visually? I don't know
exactly how those transformations happen.
Humans aren't changing in 100 years.
I think agency and community are
things that people actually want.
- A local community, yeah.
- People you are close to, being
able to do things with them
and being able to ascribe meaning to
your life and being able to do things.
In 100 years, I don't think
that human biology is
changing away from those on a
time scale that we can discuss.
And I think that UBI
does not solve agency.
I do expect mass wealth, and
I hope that it has spread
so that the average life looks
very different in 100 years.
But that's still a lot to happen.
If you think about countries
that are early in their
development process to getting
access to computing and internet, to
build all the infrastructure and have
policy that shares one
nation's wealth with
another is... I think it's
an optimistic view to see
all that happening in 100 years-
...while they are still
independent entities and not just
like absorbed into some
international order by force.
- But there could be just better,
more elaborate, more effective
... social support systems
that help alleviate
some levels of basic suffering
from the world. You know, the
transformation of society where a lot
of jobs are lost in the short term, I
think we have to really remember
that each individual job that's lost
is a human being who's
suffering. That's like a
... When jobs are lost, the
scale is a real tragedy. You can
make all kinds of arguments about
economics or how it's all going to
be okay. It's good for the GDP,
there's going to be new jobs
created. Fundamentally at the
individual level for that
human being, that's real
suffering. That's a real
personal sort of tragedy. And
we have to not forget that as
the technologies are being
developed. And also my hope
for all the AI slop we're seeing is
that there will be a greater and
greater premium for the fundamental
aspects of the human
experience that are in-person.
The things that we all... Like seeing
each other, talking together in-person.
- The next few years are definitely
going to be an increased value on
physical goods and events— ...and
even more pressure on slop.
So it'll be... the slop is only starting.
The next few years will be more and
more diverse ...versions of slop.
- They would be drowning
in slop. Is that what—
- So I'm hoping that society
drowns in slop enough to snap
out of it and be like, "We can't deal
with it. It just doesn't matter."
And then, the physical has
such a higher premium on it.
- Even like classic examples, I
honestly think this is true,
and I think we will get tired of it.
We are already kind of tired of it.
I mean, even art. I don't think art
will go away. You have paintings,
physical paintings. There's
more value, not just
monetary value, but just more
value appreciation for the actual
painting than a photocopy of that
painting. It could be a perfect digital
reprint, but there is something when you go to a
museum and you look at that art and you see the
real thing and you just think,
"Okay. A human." It's like a craft.
You have like an appreciation for that. And
I think the same is true for writing, for
talking, for any type of experience...
I do unfortunately think it
will be like a dichotomy,
like a fork where some
things will be automated.
Like, you know, there are not as many paintings
as there used to be, you know, 200 years ago.
There are more photographs,
more photocopies. But at the
same time, it won't go away.
There will be value in that.
I think the difference will just be,
you know, what's the proportion of
that. But personally, I have a hard time
reading things where I obviously see
it's obviously AI generated.
I'm sorry. It might—it
might be really good information there,
but I'm just like, "Nah, not for me."
- I think eventually they'll fool
you, and it'll be on platforms that
give ways of verifying or
building trust. So you will trust
that Lex is not AI generated, having been
here. So then you have trust in this
channel. But it's harder for new
people who don't have that trust.
- Well, that will get interesting
because I think fundamentally it's a
solvable problem by having trust
in certain outlets that they won't do it,
but it's all going to be trust-based.
There will be systems to authorize, "Okay, this
is real. This is not real." There will be some
telltale signs where you can obviously
tell this is AI generated and
this is not. But some will be so
good that it's hard to tell, and
then you have to trust. And well, that will
get interesting and a bit problematic.
- The extreme case of this is to
watermark all human content.
So all photos that we take on our own
have some watermark until they are edited
or something like this. And software
can manage communications with the
device manufacturer- device
manufacturer to maintain human editing—
which is the opposite of the discussion
to try to watermark AI images. And then
you can make a Google image that has a watermark
and use a different Google tool to remove it.
- Yep. It's going to be an
arms race, basically.
- And we've been mostly focusing
on the positive aspects of
AI. All the capabilities
that we've been talking
about can be used to destabilize
human civilization with even just
relatively dumb AI applied at scale,
and then further, superintelligent
AI systems. Of course, there's
the sort of doomer take
that's important to consider
as we develop these
technologies. What gives you
hope about the future of human
civilization, given everything we've been
talking about? Are we going to be okay?
- I think we will. I'm
definitely a worrier, both
about AI and non-AI things. But humans do
tend to find a way. I think that's what
humans are built for: to have
community and find a way to figure out
problems. That's what has gotten us
to this point. And to think that
the AI opportunity and related
technologies is really
big. And I think that there's big
social and political problems to
help everybody understand that. And I
think that's what we're staring at a
lot of right now, is like the world
is a scary place, and AI is a very
uncertain thing. And it
takes a lot of work that is
not necessarily building things.
It's like telling people and
understanding people, that the
people building AI are historically
not motivated or wanting to do.
But it is something that is
probably doable. It just will
take longer than people want.
And we have to go through that
long period of like hard, distraught AI
discussions if we want to
have the lasting benefits.
- Yeah. Through that process, I'm
especially excited that we get a
chance to better understand ourselves,
us at the individual level as
humans and at the civilization
level, and answer some of the
big mysteries, like what is
this whole consciousness thing going on
here? It seems to be truly special.
Like, there's a real miracle in
our mind. And AI puts a mirror
to ourselves and we get
to answer some of the big
questions about like, what is this
whole thing going on here?
- Well, one thing about that is also what
I do think makes us very different
from AI and why I don't
worry about AI taking over
is, like you said, consciousness. We
humans, we decide what we want to
do. AI in its current
implementation, I can't see it
changing. You have to tell
it what to do. And so you
have still the agency. It doesn't
take the agency from you because
it becomes a tool. You can think of
it as a tool. You tell it what to
do. It will be more automatic
than other previous tools.
It's certainly more powerful than a
hammer, it can figure things out, but
it's still you in charge, right? So
the AI is not in charge, you're in
charge. You tell the AI what to
do and it's doing it for you.
- So in the post-singularity,
post-apocalyptic war between
humans and machines, you're saying
humans are worth fighting for?
- 100%. I mean, this is... The
movie Terminator, they made in
the '80s, essentially,
and I do think, well,
the only thing I can see
going wrong is, of course, if
things are explicitly programmed to do
the thing that is harmful, basically.
- I think actually in that, in a Terminator
type of setup, I think humans win.
I think we're too clever. It's hard to
explain how we figure it out, but we do.
And we'll probably be using local LLMs, open
source LLMs to help fight the machines.
I apologize for the
ridiculousness. Like I said,
Nathan already knows I've been a big
fan of his for a long time. Been
a big fan of yours, Sebastian, for a long
time, so it's an honor to finally meet
you. Thank you for everything you put out into the
world. Thank you for the excellent books you're
writing. Thank you for teaching us. And
thank you for talking today. This was fun.
- Thank you for inviting us here and having
this human connection, which is actually-
- Extremely valuable- human connection.
Thanks for listening to this conversation
with Sebastian Raschka and Nathan
Lambert. To support this podcast,
please check out our sponsors in the
description, where you can also
find links to contact me, ask
questions, give feedback
and so on. And now
let me leave you with some
words from Albert Einstein.
"It is not that I'm so
smart, but I stay with the
questions much longer." Thank you for
listening, and hope to see you next time.

- It's hard for us humans to make
any kind of clean predictions about
highly nonlinear, dynamical systems.
But again, to your point,
we might be very surprised
what classical learning systems
might be able to do about even fluid.
- Yes, exactly.
I mean, fluid dynamics,
Navier-Stokes equations,
these are traditionally thought of as
very, very difficult intractable problems
to do on classical systems.
They take enormous amounts of compute,
you know, weather prediction systems,
you know, these kind of things all involve
fluid dynamics calculations.
But again, if you look
at something like Veo,
our video generation model,
it can model liquids quite
well, surprisingly well,
and materials, specular lighting.
I love the ones where, you know,
there's people who generated videos
where there's like clear liquids
going through hydraulic presses,
and then it's being squeezed out.
I used to write physics
engines and graphics engines
in my early days in gaming,
and I know it's just so painstakingly hard
to build programs that can do that.
And yet somehow these
systems are, you know,
reverse engineering from
just watching YouTube videos.
So presumably what's happening is
it's extracting some underlying structure
around how these materials behave.
So perhaps there is
some kind of lower dimensional
manifold that can be learned
if we actually fully understood
what's going on under the hood.
That's maybe, you know, maybe
true of most of reality.
- The following is a
conversation with Demis Hassabis,
his second time on the podcast.
He is the leader of Google DeepMind
and is now a Nobel Prize winner.
Demis is one of the most
brilliant and fascinating minds
in the world today,
working on understanding
and building intelligence,
and exploring the big
mysteries of our universe.
This was truly an honor
and a pleasure for me.
This is the Lex Friedman podcast.
To support it,
please check out our
sponsors in the description
and consider subscribing to this channel.
And now, dear friends,
here's Demis Hassabis.
In your Nobel Prize lecture,
you propose what I think is
a super interesting conjecture that quote,
"Any pattern that can be
generated or found in nature
can be efficiently discovered and modeled
by a classical learning algorithm."
What kind of patterns of systems
might be included in that?
Biology, chemistry,
physics, maybe cosmology?
- Yup.
- Neuroscience.
What are we talking about?
- Sure.
Well, look, I felt that
it's sort of a tradition I
think of Nobel Prize lectures
that you're supposed to be
a little bit provocative.
And I wanted to follow that tradition.
What I was talking about there is
if you take a step back
and you look at all the
work that we've done,
especially with the Alpha X projects,
so I'm thinking AlphaGo,
of course, AlphaFold.
What they really are is
we're building models of
very combinatorially,
high-dimensional spaces that,
you know, if you try to
brute force a solution,
find the best move in Go,
or find the exact shape of a protein,
and if you enumerated
all the possibilities,
there wouldn't be enough time in the,
you know, the time of the universe.
So you have to do something much smarter.
And what we did in both cases was
build models of those environments
and that guided the search in a smart way
and that makes it tractable.
So if you think about protein folding,
which is obviously a natural system,
you know, why should that be possible?
How does physics do that?
You know, proteins fold in
milliseconds in our bodies.
So somehow physics solves this problem
that we've now also
solved computationally.
And I think the reason
that's possible is that,
in nature, natural systems have structure
because they were subject to
evolutionary processes that shaped them.
And if that's true,
then you can maybe learn
what that structure is.
- So this perspective I think
is a really interesting one,
you've hinted it, at it,
which is almost like crudely stated,
anything that can be evolved
can be efficiently modeled.
You think there's some truth to that?
- Yeah, I sometimes call it
survival of the stablest
or something like that,
because, you know,
of course, there's evolution
for life, living things,
but there's also, you know,
if you think about geological times,
so the shape of mountains
that's being shaped by
weathering processes, right,
over thousands of years.
But then you can even take a cosmological,
the orbits of planets,
the shapes of asteroids,
these have all been
survived kind of processes
that have acted on them many, many times.
So if that's true,
then there should be some sort of pattern
that you can kind of reverse learn
and a kind of manifold
really that helps you search
to the right solution, to the right shape,
and actually allow you to
predict things about it
in an efficient way.
Because it's not a random pattern, right?
So it may not be possible
for manmade things or abstract things like
factorizing large numbers,
because unless there's
patterns in the number space,
which there might be,
but if there's not and it's uniform,
then there's no pattern to learn,
there's no model to learn
that will help you search,
you have to do brute force.
So in that case, you know,
you maybe need a quantum
computer, something like this.
But in most things in nature
that we're interested in
are not like that.
They have structure
that evolved for a reason
and survived over time.
And if that's true,
I think that's potentially
learnable by neural network.
- It's like nature's
doing a search process.
And it's so fascinating
that in that search process
it's creating systems that
could be efficiently modeled.
- That's right, yeah.
- So interesting.
- So they can be efficiently
rediscovered or recovered
because nature's not random, right?
Everything that we see around us,
including like the elements
that are more stable,
all of those things,
they're subject to some kind
of selection process pressure.
- Do you think,
because you're also a fan of
theoretical computer
science and complexity,
do you think we can come up
with a kind of complexity class,
like a complexity zoo type of class
where maybe it's the set
of learnable systems,
the set of learnable natural systems,
LNS?
- Yeah.
- This is Demis Hassabis'
new class of systems
that could be actually learnable
by classical systems in this kind of way,
natural systems that can
be modeled efficiently?
- Yeah, I mean,
I've always been fascinated
by the P equals NP question
and what is modelable
by classical systems,
by non-quantum systems, you
know, Turing machines in effect.
And that's exactly what
I'm working on actually
in kind of my few moments of spare time
with a few colleagues
about is should there be,
you know, maybe a new class or problem
that is solvable by this type
of neural network process
and kind of mapped onto
these natural systems.
So, you know,
the things that exist in
physics and have structure.
So I think that could be
a very interesting new
way of thinking about it.
And it sort of fits
with the way I think
about physics in general,
which is that, you know, I
think information is primary.
Information is the most sort of
fundamental unit of the universe,
more fundamental than energy and matter.
I think they can all be
converted into each other,
but I think of the universe
as a kind of informational system.
- So when you think of the universe
as an informational system,
then the P equals NP question
is a physics question.
- [Demis] That's right.
- And is a question that can help us
actually solve the entirety
of this whole thing going on.
- Yeah, I think it's one of
the most fundamental questions actually
if you think of physics as informational.
And the answer to that
I think is gonna be,
you know, very enlightening.
- More specific to the P and NP question.
This again, some of the
stuff we're saying is
kind of crazy right now.
Just like the Christian
Anfinsen Nobel Prize speech,
controversial thing that
he said sounded crazy,
and then you went and got
a Nobel prize for this
with John Jumper,
solved the problem.
So let me just stick to the P equals NP.
Do you think there's something
in this thing we're talking
about that could be shown
if you can do something
like polynomial time
or constant time compute ahead of time
and construct this gigantic model,
then you can solve
some of these extremely difficult problems
in a theoretic computer
science kind of way?
- Yeah, I think that there are
actually a huge class of problems
that could be couched in this way,
the way we did AlphaGo and
the way we did AlphaFold,
where, you know,
you model what the
dynamics of the system is,
the properties of that system,
the environment that you
are trying to understand.
And then that makes the
search for the solution
or the prediction of
the next step efficient
basically polynomial times,
so tractable by a classical system,
which a neural network is.
It runs on normal computers, right,
classical computers,
Turing machines in effect.
And I think
it's one of the most
interesting questions there is
is how far can that paradigm go?
You know, I think we've proven
the AI community in general
that classical systems, Turing
machines can go a lot further
than we previously thought.
You know, they can do things like
model the structures of proteins
and play Go to better
than world champion level.
And you know, a lot of
people would've thought
maybe 10, 20 years ago
that was decades away,
or maybe you would need
some sort of quantum
machines, quantum systems
to be able to do things
like protein folding.
And so I think we haven't really
even sort of scratched the surface yet
of what classical systems
so-called could do.
And of course, AGI being built
on a neural network system
on top of a neural network system
on top of a classical computer would be
the ultimate expression of that.
And I think the limit the, you know,
what the bounds of that kind of system,
what it can do,
it's a very interesting question
and directly speaks to
the P equals NP question.
- What do you think, again, hypothetical,
might be outside of this
maybe emergent phenomena?
Like if you look at cellular automata,
some of have extremely simple systems
and then some complexity emerges.
- Yes.
- Maybe that would be outside
or even would you guess
even that might be amenable
to efficient modeling
by a classical machine?
- Yeah, I think those systems would be
right on the boundary, right?
So I think most emergent
systems, cellular automata,
things like that could be
modelable by a classical system.
You just sort of do a
forward simulation of it
and it'd probably be efficient enough.
Of course, there's the question of things
like chaotic systems
where the initial
conditions really matter,
and then you get to some, you
know, uncorrelated end state.
Now those could be difficult to model.
So I think these are kind
of the open questions.
But I think when you step back
and look at what we've
done with the systems
and the problems that we've solved,
and then you look at things that Veo 3
on like video generation
sort of rendering physics and
lighting and things like that,
you know, really core
fundamental things in physics,
it's pretty interesting.
I think it's telling us
something quite fundamental about
how the universe is
structured in my opinion.
So, you know, in a way that's
what I wanna build AGI for is
to help us as scientists
answer these questions
like P equals NP.
- Yeah, I think we might be
continuously surprised about
what is modelable by classical computers.
I mean, AlphaFold 3 on the
interaction side is surprising,
that you can make any kind of
progress on that direction.
AlphaGenome is surprising
that you can map the genetic
code to the function.
Kind of playing with the
emergent kind of phenomena,
you think there's so many
combinatorial options that,
and then here you go,
you can find the kernel
that is efficiently modeled.
- Yes, because there's some structure,
there's some landscape, you know,
in the energy landscape or whatever it is
that you can follow, some
grading you can follow.
And of course, what neural
networks are very good at
is following gradients.
And so if there's one to follow
and you can specify the
objective function correctly,
you know, you don't have to
deal with all that complexity,
which I think is how we maybe
have naively thought about it
for decades those problems.
If you just enumerate
all the possibilities,
it looks totally intractable.
And there's many, many problems like that.
And then you think,
well, it's like 10 to 300
possible protein structures,
it's 10 to the 170 possible Go positions.
All of these are way more
than atoms in the universe.
So how could one possibly
find the right solution
or predict the next step?
But it turns out that it is possible.
And of course, reality in
nature does do it, right?
Proteins do fold.
So that gives you confidence
that there must be,
if we understood how physics
was doing that in a sense,
and we could mimic that
process, model that process,
it should be possible
on our classical systems
is basically what the conjecture's about.
- And of course there's
nonlinear dynamical systems,
highly nonlinear dynamical systems,
everything involving fluid.
- Yes, right.
- You know, recently I had a
conversation with Terence Tao
who mathematically contends
with a very difficult aspect of systems
that have some singularities in them
that break the mathematics.
And it's just hard for us humans
to make any kind of
clean predictions about
highly nonlinear dynamical systems.
But again, to your point,
we might be very surprised
what classical learning systems
might be able to do about even fluid.
- Yes, exactly.
I mean, fluid dynamics,
Navier-Stokes equations,
these are traditionally thought of as
very, very difficult
intractable kind of problems
to do on classical systems.
They take enormous amounts of compute,
you know, weather prediction systems,
you know, these kind of things all involve
fluid dynamics calculations.
And, but again,
if you look at something like Veo,
our video generation model,
it can model liquids quite
well, surprisingly well,
and materials, specular lighting.
I love the ones where, you know,
there's people who generated videos
where there's like clear liquids
going through hydraulic presses
and then it's being squeezed out.
I used to write physics
engines and graphics engines
in my early days in gaming,
and I know it's just so painstakingly hard
to build programs that can do that.
And yet somehow these
systems are, you know,
reverse engineering from
just watching YouTube videos.
So presumably what's happening is
it's extracting some
underlying structure around
how these materials behave.
So perhaps there is some kind of
lower dimensional manifold
that can be learned
if we actually fully understood
what's going on under the hood.
That's maybe, you know, maybe
true of most of reality.
- Yeah, I've been continuously precisely
by this aspect of Veo 3.
I think a lot of people
highlight different aspects,
including the comedic and the meme,
- Yes.
- all that kind of stuff.
And then the ultrarealistic
ability to capture humans
in a really nice way
that's compelling and
feels close to reality,
and then combine that with native audio.
All of those are marvelous
things about Veo 3.
But the exactly the
thing you're mentioning,
which is the physics.
- [Demis] Yeah.
- It's not perfect, but
it's damn pretty good.
And then the really interesting
scientific question is
what is it understanding about our world
in order to be able to do that?
Because the cynical take
with diffusion models,
there's no way it understands anything.
But it seems, I mean,
I don't think you can generate
that kind of video without understanding.
And then our own philosophical notion of
what it means to understand
then is like brought to the surface.
Like to what degree do you think Veo 3
understands our world?
- I think to the extent that
it can predict the next frames,
you know, in a coherent way.
That is a form, you know,
of understanding, right?
Not in the anthropomorphic version of,
you know, it's not some kind of
deep philosophical understanding
of what's going on.
I don't think these systems have that.
But they certainly have
modeled enough of the dynamics,
you know, put it that way,
that they can pretty accurately
generate whatever it is,
eight seconds of consistent
video that by eye
at least, you know, at a glance,
it's quite hard to distinguish
what the issues are.
And imagine that in two
or three more years time,
that's the thing I'm thinking about
and how incredible they will look,
given where we've come from, you know,
the early versions of
that one or two years ago.
And so the rate of progress is incredible.
And I think I'm like you is
like a lot of people love
all of the standup comedians
that actually captures a lot
of human dynamics very well
and body language.
But actually the thing
I'm most impressed with
and fascinated by is
the physics behavior,
the lighting and materials and liquids.
And it's pretty amazing
that it can do that.
And I think that shows it that it has
some notion of at least
intuitive physics, right?
How things are supposed
to work intuitively?
Maybe the way that a human child
would understand physics, right?
As opposed to a, you know,
a PhD student really being able
to unpack all the equations.
It's more of an intuitive
physics understanding.
- Well, that intuitive
physics understanding,
that's the base layer,
that's the thing people
sometimes call a common sense.
Like it really understands something.
I think that really
surprised a lot of people.
It blows my mind that
I just didn't think it would
be possible to generate
that level of realism
without understanding.
You know, there's this notion
that you can only understand
the physical world
by having an embodied AI system,
a robot that interacts with that world.
That's the only way to construct
an understanding of that world.
- [Demis] Yeah.
- But Veo 3 is directly challenging that
it feels like.
- Right, yes.
And it's very interesting.
You know, if you were to
ask me five, 10 years ago,
I would've said,
even though I was immersed in all of this,
I would've said, well, yeah,
you probably need to
understand intuitive physics.
You know, like if I
push this off the table,
this glass it will
maybe shatter, you know,
and the liquid will spill out, right?
So we know all of these things.
But I thought that, you know,
and there's a lot
theories in neuroscience,
it's called action in perception where,
you know, you need to act in the world
to really, truly perceive
it in a deep way.
And there was a lot of theories about
you'd need embodied intelligence
or robotics or something
or maybe at least simulated action
so that you would understand
things like intuitive physics.
But it seems like you can understand it
through passive observation,
which is pretty surprising to me.
And again, I think hints at
something underlying about
the nature of reality in my opinion,
beyond just the, you know,
the cool videos that it generates.
And of course there's next stages is
maybe even making those videos interactive
so one can actually step into
them and move around them,
which would be really mind blowing,
especially given my games background.
So you can imagine.
And then I think, you know,
we're starting to get towards
what I would call a world model,
a model of how the world works,
the mechanics of the world,
the physics of the world,
and the things in that world.
And of course that's what you would need
for a true AGI system.
- I have to talk to you about video games.
- Yes.
- You're being a bit trolly.
I think you're having more
and more fun on Twitter on X,
which is great to see.
So a guy named Jimmy Apples tweeted,
let me play a video game
of my Veo 3 videos already
Google cooked so good.
Playable world models wen?
It's spelled W-E-N, question mark.
And then you quote tweeted that with,
now wouldn't that be something.
So how hard is it to
build game worlds with AI?
Maybe can you look out into
the future of video games
- Hmm.
- five, 10 years out.
- Hmm.
- What do you think that looks like?
- Well, games were my first love really.
And doing AI for games was
the first thing I did
professionally in my teenage years
and was the first major
AI systems that I built.
And I always wanna,
I wanna scratch that itch one
day and come back to that.
So, you know, and I will do I think.
And I think I'd sort of
dream about, you know,
what would I have done back in the '90s
if I'd had access to the kind
of AI systems we have today.
And I think you could build
absolutely mind-blowing games.
And I think the next stage,
I always used to love making,
all the games I've made
are open world games.
So they're games where
there's a simulation
and then there's AI characters
and then the player interacts
with that simulation
and the simulation adapts
to the way the player plays.
And I always thought they were
the coolest games because,
so games like Theme Park that I worked on
where everybody's game experience
would be unique to them, right?
Because you are kind of
co-creating the game, right?
We set up the parameters,
we set up initial conditions,
and then you as the player immerse in it,
and then you are co-creating
it with the simulation.
But of course it's very hard
to program open world games.
You know, you've got to
be able to create content
whichever direction the player goes in.
And you want it to be compelling
no matter what the player chooses.
And so it was always
quite difficult to build
things like cellular automata actually,
type of those kind of classical systems
which created some emergent behavior.
But they're always a little bit fragile,
a little bit limited.
Now we are maybe on the
cusp in the next few years,
five, 10 years of having AI systems
that can truly create
around your imagination,
can sort of dynamically change the story
and storytell the narrative
around and make it dramatic
no matter what you end up choosing.
So it's like the ultimate
choose your own adventure sort of game.
And, you know,
I think maybe we are within reach,
if you think of a kind of
interactive version of Veo.
And then wind that
forward five to 10 years
and you know, imagine
how good it's gonna be.
- Yeah, so you said a lot of
super interesting stuff there.
So one, the open world built into that is
a deep personalization the
way you've described it.
So it's not just that it's open world,
that you can open any door and
there'll be something there.
It's that the choice
of which door you open
in an unconstrained way
defines the worlds you see.
So some games try to do that.
They give you choice.
- Yes.
- But it's really just
an illusion of choice.
- Yes.
- 'cause you only,
like Stanley Parable,
- Yeah.
- this game I use to play.
It's really, there's a couple of doors
and it really just takes
you down a narrative.
Stanley Parable is a great video game.
I recommend people play.
- Yeah.
- That kind of in a meta way
mocks the illusion of choice.
And there's philosophical
notions of free will and so on.
But I do like one of my favorite games,
Elder Scrolls Daggerfall I believe,
that they really played with like
random generation of the dungeons,
- [Demis] Yeah.
- of you can step in,
- Yes.
- and they give you this
feeling of an open world.
And there you mentioned interactivity,
you don't need to interact.
That's the first step
'cause you don't need
to interact that much.
You just, when you open the door,
whatever you see is
randomly generated for you.
- Yeah.
- And that's already an
incredible experience
'cause you might be the only
person to ever see that.
- Yeah, exactly.
And so, but what you'd
like is a little bit better
than just sort of a
random generation, right?
So you'd like,
and also better than a simple
A-B hard-coded choice, right?
That's not really open world, right?
As you say, it's just giving
you the illusion of choice.
What you want to be able to do is
potentially anything in
that game environment.
And I think the only
way you can do that is
to have generated systems,
systems that will
generate that on the fly.
Of course, you can't create
infinite amounts of game assets, right?
It's expensive enough already
how AAA games are made today.
And that was obvious
to us back in the '90s
when I was working on all these games.
I think maybe Black & White
was the game that I worked on,
early stages of that,
that had the still probably
the best learning AI in it.
It was an early reinforcement
learning system that you,
you know, you were looking
after this mythical creature
and growing it and nurturing it.
And depending how you treated it,
it would treat the villagers
in that world in the same way.
So if you were mean to
it, it would be mean.
If you were good, it would be protective.
And so it was really a reflection
of the way you played it.
So actually all of the,
I've been working on sort
of simulations and AI
through the medium of games
at the beginning of my career.
And really the whole of what I
do today is still a follow on
from those early more
hard-coded ways of doing the AI
to now, you know, fully
general learning systems
that are trying to achieve the same thing.
- Yeah, it's been interesting, hilarious,
and fun to watch you and Elon
obviously itching to create
games 'cause you're both gamers.
And one of the sad aspects
of your incredible success
in so many domains of science,
like serious adult stuff,
- Yeah.
- that you might not have
time to really create a game.
You might end up creating the tooling
that others will create the game
and you have to watch others
- Exactly.
- create the thing
you've always dreamed of.
Do you think it's possible you can somehow
in your extremely busy schedule,
actually find time to create
something like Black & White?
An actual video game where like you could
make the childhood dream
- Yeah, well you know,
- become reality?
- there's two things,
what I think about that is
maybe that with vibe coding
as it gets better,
- Yeah.
- and there's a possibility that
I could, you know,
- Yes, sure.
- one could do that
actually in your spare time.
So I'm quite excited about that.
That would be my project
if I got the time to do some vibe coding.
I'm actually itching to do that.
And then the other thing is,
you know, maybe it's
a sabbatical after AGI
has been safely stewarded into the world
and delivered into the world.
You know, that and then
working on my physics theory
as we talked about at the beginning.
Those would be the two,
my two post AGI projects,
let's call it that way.
- I would love to see
which post AGI,
- The old spec game.
- post AGI would you choose
solving the problem that
some of the smartest people in
human history contended with.
So P equals NP or creating
a cool video game.
- Yeah.
Well, but in my world they'd be related
because it would be an
open world simulated game
as realistic as possible.
So, you know, what is the universe
that's speaking to the
same question, right?
P equals NP, I think all
these things are related,
at least in my mind.
- I mean in a really serious way,
video games sometimes
are looked down upon.
It's just this fun side activity.
But especially,
as AI does more and more of
the difficult boring tasks,
something we in modern world called work,
you know, video games is the thing
in which we may find
meaning in which we may find
like what to do with our time.
You could create incredibly
rich, meaningful experiences.
Like that's what human life is.
And then in video games,
you can create more sophisticated,
more diverse ways of living,
right?
- Yeah.
- That's the core idea.
- I think so.
I mean, those of us who love
games and I still do is,
you know, it's almost can let
your imagination run wild,
right?
Like I used to love games
and working on games so much
because it's the fusion,
especially in the '90s and early 2000s,
the sort of golden era,
and maybe the '80s of the games industry.
And it was all being discovered.
New genres were being discovered.
We weren't just making games,
we felt we were creating
a new entertainment medium
that never existed before, right?
Especially with these open
world games and simulation games
where you as the player
were co-creating the story.
There's no other media,
entertainment media where you do that,
where you as the audience
actually co-create the story.
And of course now with
multiplayer games as well,
it can be a very social activity
and can explore all kinds of
interesting worlds in that.
But on the other hand, you know,
it's very important to
also enjoy and experience
the physical world.
But the question is then,
you know, I think we're gonna have
to kind of confront the question again of
what is the fundamental nature of reality?
What is gonna be the difference
between these increasingly
realistic simulations
and multiplayer ones and emergent
and what we do in the real world?
- Yeah, there's clearly
a huge amount of value
to experiencing the real world nature.
There's also a huge amount of value
in experiencing other
humans directly in person
the way we're sitting here today.
- [Demis] Yes.
- But we need to really
scientifically rigorously
answer the question why.
- Yeah, exactly.
- And which aspect of that can be mapped
- Yeah.
- into the virtual world?
- [Demis] Exactly.
- And it's not enough to say,
yeah, you should go touch
grass and hang out in nature,
it's like why exactly
- Yeah, yeah.
- is that valuable?
- Yes.
And I guess that's maybe the thing
that's been haunting me or obsessing me
from the beginning of my career.
If you think about all the
different things I've done
they're all related in that way.
The simulation, nature of reality,
and what is the bounds of,
you know, what can be modeled.
- Sorry for the ridiculous question,
but so far, what is the
greatest video game of all time?
What's up there?
What makes it?
- Well,
my favorite one of all time
is Civilization I have to say.
That was the Civilization
I and Civilization II
my favorite games of all time.
- I can only assume you've
avoided the most recent one
because it would probably,
that would be your sabbatical.
You would disappear.
- Yes, exactly.
They take a lot of time
these Civilization games,
so I've got to be careful with them.
- Fun question,
you and Elon seem to be
somehow solid gamers,
is there a connection
between being great at gaming
and being great leaders of AI companies?
- I don't know.
It's an interesting one.
I mean, we both love games.
And it's interesting,
he wrote games as well to start off with.
It's probably, it's especially
in the era I grew up in
where home computers
were just became a thing,
you know, in the late '80s and '90s,
especially in the UK.
I had a Spectrum and then
a Commodore Amiga 500,
which is my,
- Nice.
- my favorite computer ever.
And that's where I
learned all programming.
And of course it's a very
fun thing to program,
is to program games.
So I think it's a great
way to learn programming,
probably still is.
And then of course
I immediately took it in
directions of AI and simulations,
so I was able to express
my interest in games
and my sort of wider scientific
interests altogether.
And then the final thing I think
that's great about games is
it fuses artistic design, you know, art,
with the most cutting edge programming.
So again, in the '90s,
all of the most interesting
technical advances
were happening in gaming.
Whether that was AI, graphics,
physics engines, hardware,
even GPUs of course were
designed for gaming originally.
So everything that was pushing
computing forward in the '90s
was due to gaming.
So interestingly that was
where the forefront of
research was going on.
And it was this incredible
fusion with art,
you know, graphics but also music
and just the whole new
media of storytelling.
And I love that.
For me it's this sort of
multidisciplinary kind of effort is
again, something I've
enjoyed my whole life.
- I have to ask you I almost
forgot about one of the many
and I would say one of the
most incredible things recently
that somehow didn't yet get
enough attention is AlphaEvolve.
We talked about evolution a little bit,
but it's the Google DeepMind system
that evolves algorithms.
- Yeah.
- Are these kinds of evolution
like techniques promising
as a component of future
superintelligence system?
So for people who don't know,
it's kind of, I don't
know if it's fair to say,
it's LLM-guided evolution search.
- Yeah.
- So evolutionary algorithms
- are doing the search,
- Yes.
- and LLMs are telling you where.
- Yes, exactly.
So LLMs are kind of proposing
some possible solutions
and then you use
evolutionary computing on top
to find some novel part
of the search space.
So actually I think it's an example of
very promising directions
where you combine LLMs
or foundation models
with other computational techniques.
Evolutionary methods is one,
but you could also imagine
Monte Carlo Tree Search.
Basically many types of
search algorithms or reasoning algorithms
sort of on top of or using the
foundation models as a basis.
So I actually think there's quite
a lot of interesting things
to be discovered probably
with these sort of hybrid
systems let's call them.
- But not to romanticize evolution.
- Yeah.
- And I'm only human.
But you think there's some value
in whatever that mechanism is.
'Cause we already talked
about natural systems.
Do you think there's a lot of
low-hanging fruit of us understanding,
being able to model,
being able to simulate
evolution and then using that,
whatever we understand about that nature,
its biomechanism,
to then do search better
and better and better.
- Yes, so if you think about, again,
breaking down the sort
of systems we've built
to their really fundamental core,
you've got like the model of
the underlying dynamics of the system.
And then if you want to
discover something new,
something novel that
hasn't been seen before,
then you need some kind
of search process on top
to take you to a novel
region of the search space.
And you can do that in a number of ways.
Evolutionary computing is one.
With AlphaGo,
we just use Monte Carlo
Tree Search, right?
And that's what found move 37,
the new kind of never seen
before strategy in Go.
And so that's how you can go
beyond potentially what is already known.
So the model can model everything
that you currently know about, right,
all the data that you currently have,
but then how do you go beyond that?
So that starts to speak about
the ideas of creativity.
How can these systems
create something new,
discover something new?
Obviously this is super relevant
for scientific discovery
or pushing med science
and medicine forward,
which we want to do with these systems.
And you can actually bolt on
some fairly simple search
systems on top of these models
and get you into a new region of space.
Of course, you also have to make sure that
you are not searching that
space totally randomly,
it would be too big.
So you have to have
some objective function
that you're trying to optimize
and hill climb towards
and that guides that search.
- But there's some mechanism of evolution
that are interesting,
maybe in the space of programs,
but then the space of program is
an extremely important space,
'cause you can probably generalize
to everything, you know.
But you know, for example, mutation.
So it's not just Monte Carlo Tree Search
where it's like a search.
You could every once in a while,
- Combine things, yeah.
- combine things, alter,
like a components of a thing.
- Yes.
- So then, you know what
evolution is really good at is
not just the natural selection,
it's combining things and
building increasingly complex
hierarchical systems.
- Yes.
- So that component's super interesting.
- Yeah.
- Especially like
with AlphaEvolve and
the space of programs.
- Yeah, exactly.
So there's, you can get a bit of
an extra property out of
revolutionary systems,
which is some new emergent
capability may come about.
- Yes.
- Right, of course,
like what happened with life.
Interestingly with naive
sort of traditional
evolution computing methods,
without LLMs and the modern AI,
the problem with them,
they were very well studied
in the '90s and early 2000s
and some promising results,
but the problem was they
could never work out
how to evolve new properties,
new emergent properties.
You always had a sort of
subset of the properties
that you put into the system.
But maybe if we combine them
with these foundation models,
perhaps we can overcome that limitation.
Obviously naturally evolution clearly did
'cause it did evolve
new capabilities, right?
So bacteria to where we are now.
So clearly that it must be possible
with evolutionary systems
to generate new patterns,
you know, going back to the
first thing we talked about,
and new capabilities
and emergent properties.
And maybe we're on the cusp
of discovering how to do that.
- Yeah, listen,
AlphaEvolve is one of the
coolest things I've ever seen.
I, on my desk at home, you know,
most of my time is spent on
that computer just programming.
And next to the three screens
is a skull of a Tiktaalik,
which is one of the early organisms
that crawled out of the water onto land.
And I just kind of watch that little guy.
It's like,
whatever the competition
mechanism of evolution is
it's quite incredible.
- Yes.
- It's truly, truly incredible.
- Yeah.
- Now whether that's exactly
the thing we need to do to do our search,
but never dismiss the power
of nature what it did here.
- Yeah, and it's amazing,
which is a relatively simple
algorithm, right, effectively.
And it can generate all of this
immense complexity emerges,
obviously running over,
you know, four billion years of time.
But it's, you know,
you can think about that as again,
a search process that ran over
the physics substrate of the universe
for a long amount of computational time,
but then it generated all this
incredible rich diversity.
- So, so many questions I wanna ask you.
So one, you do have a dream,
one of the natural systems
you want to try to model is a cell.
- Yes.
- That's a beautiful dream.
I could ask you about that.
I also, just, for that purpose
on the AI scientist front,
just broadly,
so there's a essay from
Daniel Kokotajlo, Scott
Alexander and others
that outline steps along
the way to get to ASI
and has a lot of interesting ideas in it,
one of which is including
a superhuman coder
and a superhuman AI researcher.
And in that,
there's a term of research
taste that's really interesting.
So in everything you've seen,
do you think it's possible for AI systems
to have research taste,
to help you in the way
that AI co-scientists does,
to help steer human, brilliant scientists,
and then potentially
by itself to figure out
what are the directions
where you want to generate
truly novel ideas?
Because that seems to be like
a really important component
of how to do great science.
- Yeah, I think that's gonna be
one of the hardest things
to mimic or model is
this idea of taste or judgment.
I think that's what
separates the, you know,
the great scientists
from the good scientists.
Like all professional scientists
are good technically, right,
otherwise they wouldn't
have been made it that far
in academia and things like that.
But then do you have the
taste to sort of sniff out
what the right direction is,
what the right experiment is,
what the right question is.
So picking the right question
is the hardest part of science
and making the right hypothesis.
And that's what, you know,
today's systems definitely they can't do.
So, you know,
I often say it's harder to
come up with a conjecture,
a really good conjecture
than it is to solve it.
So we may have systems soon
that can solve pretty hard conjectures.
You know, Math Olympiad
problems where you know,
AlphaProof last year our
system got, you know,
silver medal in that.
Really hard problems.
Maybe eventually we'll solve
a Millennium Prize kind of problem.
But could a system come up with
a conjecture worthy of study
that someone like Terence
Tao would've gone,
you know what, that's
a really deep question
about the nature of maths
or the nature of numbers
or the nature of physics.
And that is far harder type of creativity.
And we don't really know,
today's systems clearly can't do that
and we're not quite sure
what that mechanism would be.
This kind of leap of imagination,
like Einstein had when he
came up with, you know,
special relativity and
then general relativity
with the knowledge you had at the time.
- And for conjecture,
you want to come up with a
thing that's interesting,
it's amenable to proof.
- Yes.
- So like, it's easy
to come up with a thing
that's extremely difficult.
- Yeah.
- It's easy to come up with a
thing that's extremely easy,
but that at that very edge,
- That sweet spot, right,
of basically advancing the science
and splitting the hypothesis
space into two ideally, right?
Whether if it's true or not true,
you've learned something really useful
and that's hard.
And making something
that's also, you know,
falsifiable and within
sort of the technologies
that you currently have available.
So it's a very creative process, actually,
highly creative process that
I think just a kind of naive
search on top of a model
won't be enough for that.
- Okay, the idea of splitting
the hypothesis space in two
is super interesting.
So I've heard you say that
there's basically no failure in,
or failure is extremely
valuable if it's done,
if you construct the questions right,
if you construct the experiments right,
if you design them right,
that failure or success are both useful.
So perhaps,
- Yes.
- because it's splits the
hypothesis basically too,
it's like a binary search.
- Yes, that's right.
So when you do like, you know,
real blue sky research,
there's no such thing as failure really
as long as you are picking
experiments and hypotheses
that meaningfully split
the hypothesis space.
So, you know, and you learn something,
you can learn something
kind of equally valuable
from an experiment that doesn't work.
That should tell you if you've
designed the experiment well
and your hypotheses are are interesting,
it should tell you a lot
about where to go next.
And then you're effectively
doing a search process
and using that information in,
you know, very helpful ways.
- So to go to your dream
of modeling a cell,
what are the big challenges
that lay ahead for us
to make that happen?
We should maybe highlight that AlphaFold,
I mean there's just so many leaps.
- Yeah.
- So AlphaFold solved,
if it's fair to say protein folding,
and there's so many incredible things
we could talk about there
including the open sourcing,
everything you've released.
AlphaFold 3 is doing protein,
RNA, DNA interactions,
which is super complicated
and fascinating.
It's amenable to modeling.
AlphaGenome predicts how
small genetic changes.
Like if we think about single mutations,
how they link to actual function?
So those, it seems like
it's creeping along,
- Yes.
- to sophisticated,
to much more complicated
things like a cell,
but a cell has a lot of
really complicated components.
- Yeah.
So what I've tried to do
throughout my career is
I have these really grand dreams
and then I try to, as you've noticed,
and then I try to break,
but I try to break them
down any, you know,
it's easy to have a kind
of a crazy ambitious dream.
But the trick is how do you break it down
into manageable, achievable, interim steps
that are meaningful and
useful in their own right.
And so virtual cell,
which is what I call the
project of modeling a cell,
I've had this idea, you know,
of wanting to do that for
maybe more like 25 years.
And I used to talk with Paul Nurse,
who is a bit of a mentor
of mine in biology.
He runs the, you know,
founded the Crick Institute
and won the Nobel prize in 2001.
We've been talking about it since,
you know, before, you know, in the '90s.
And I used to come back
to every five years like,
what would you need to model
of the full internals of a cell
so that you could do
experiments on the virtual cell
and what those experiment,
you know, in silico.
And those predictions
would be useful for you
to save you a lot of time
in the wet lab, right?
That would be the dream.
Maybe you could 100X speed up experiments
by doing most of it in silico,
the search in silico,
and then you do the validation
step in the wet lab.
That would be, that's the dream.
And so, but maybe now, finally,
so I was trying to build these components,
AlphaFold being one,
that would allow you eventually to model
the full interaction, a
full simulation of a cell.
And I'd probably start with a yeast cell.
And partly that's what Paul Nurse studied
because the yeast cell
is like a full organism
that's a single cell, right?
So it's the kind of simplest
single cell organism.
And so it's not just a
cell, it's a full organism.
And yeast is very well understood.
And so that would be a good candidate for
a kind of full simulated model.
Now AlphaFold is the
solution to the kind of
static picture of what
does a protein look,
a 3D structure protein look like,
a static picture of it.
But we know that biology,
all the interesting things happen
with the dynamics, the interactions.
And that's what AlphaFold 3
is the first step towards is
modeling those interactions.
So first of all, pairwise,
you know, proteins with proteins,
proteins with RNA and DNA,
but then the next step after that
would be modeling maybe a whole pathway,
maybe like the TOR pathway
that's involved in cancer
or something like this.
And then eventually you
might be able to model,
you know, a whole cell.
- Also, there's another complexity here
that stuff in a cell happens
at different timescales.
Is that tricky?
Like they're, you know,
protein folding is, you know, super fast.
- [Demis] Yes.
- I don't know all the
biological mechanisms,
- Yeah.
- but some of them
take a long time.
- Yeah.
- And so that's a level,
so the levels of interaction has
a different temporal scale
- Yeah.
- that you have to be able to model.
- So that would be hard.
So you'd probably need
several simulated systems
that can interact at these
different temporal dynamics,
or at least maybe it's
like a hierarchical system
so you can jump up or down
the different temporal stages.
- So can you avoid,
I mean, one of the challenges
here is not avoid simulating,
for example, the quantum
mechanical aspects of
any of this, right?
You want to not over model.
You could skip ahead to just model
the really high level things
that get you a really good estimate of
what's going to happen.
- Yes.
So you got to make a decision
when you're modeling any natural system,
what is the cutoff level of
the granularity that
you're gonna model it to
that then captures the dynamics
that you're interested in?
So probably for a cell,
I would hope that would
be the protein level
and that one wouldn't have to
go down to the atomic level.
So, you know,
and of course, that's where
AlphaFold stock kicks in.
So that would be kind of the basis
and then you'd build these
higher level simulations
that take those as building blocks
and then you get the emergent behavior.
- Apologize for the pothead
questions ahead of time,
but do you think we'll be
able to simulate a model,
the origin of life?
So being able to simulate the first,
from non-living organisms,
the birth of a living organism.
- I think that's a one of the, of course,
one of the deepest and
most fascinating questions.
I love that area of biology.
You know, there's people like,
there's a great book by Nick Lane,
one of the top experts in this area called
"The Ten Great Inventions of Evolution."
I think it's fantastic.
And it also speaks to what
the great filters might be,
you know, prior or are they ahead of us?
I think they're most likely in the past
if you read that book
of how unlikely to go,
you know, have any life at all.
And then single cell to multi-cell
seems an unbelievably big jump that took
like a billion years I think
- Yeah.
- on Earth to do, right?
So it shows you how hard it was, right?
- Bacteria were super happy
for a very long time.
- For a very long time
before they captured
mitochondria somehow, right?
I don't see why not,
why AI couldn't help with
that some kind of simulation.
Again, it's a bit of a search process
through a combinatorial space.
Here's like all the,
you know, the chemical
soup that you start with,
the primordial soup that, you know,
maybe was on Earth near these hot vents,
here's some initial conditions,
can you generate something
that looks like a cell?
So perhaps that would be a next stage
after the virtual cell project is,
well, how could you actually
something like that emerge
from the chemical soup?
- Well, I would love it
if there was a move 37
for the origin of life.
- Yeah.
- I think that's one of the
sort of great mysteries.
I think ultimately what we'll
figure out is their continuum.
There's no such thing as a line
between non-living and living.
But if we can make that rigorous.
- Yes.
- That the very thing
from the Big Bang to today
has been the same process.
If you can break down that wall
that we've constructed in our minds of
the actual origin from
non-living to living,
that it's not a line
that it's a continuum,
that connects physics and
chemistry and biology.
- Yeah.
- There's no line.
- I mean, this is my whole reason
why I've worked on AI
and AGI my whole life.
Because I think it can
be the ultimate tool
to help us answer these kind of questions.
And I don't really understand why,
you know, the average
person doesn't think like,
worry about this stuff more.
Like how can we not have
a good definition of life
and living and non-living
and the nature of time,
and let alone, consciousness and gravity
and all these things.
And quantum mechanics weirdness.
It's just, to me,
I've always had this sort of
screaming at me in my face, the whole,
and it's getting louder.
You know, it's like how,
what is going on here?
You know, and I mean that
in the deeper sense like,
you know, the nature of reality,
which has to be the ultimate question.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- That would answer all of these things.
It's sort of crazy if you think about it.
We can stare at each other,
and every one of these
living things all the time,
we can inspect it
microscopes and take it apart
almost down to the atomic level,
and yet we still can't
answer that clearly,
- Yeah.
- in a simple way,
that question of how do you define living?
- [Lex] Yeah.
- It's kind of amazing.
- Yeah, living,
you can kind of talk your
way out of thinking about,
but like consciousness,
like we have this very obviously
subjective conscious experience,
like we're at the center of our own world
and it feels like something.
And then,
how are you not screaming,
- Yeah.
- at the mystery of it all, right?
I mean, but really,
humans have been contending
with the mystery of the world
around them for a long, long.
There's a lot of mysteries.
Like what's up with the sun and the rain.
- Yeah.
- Like what's that about?
And then like last year
we had a lot of rain
and this year we don't have rain.
Like what did we do wrong?
Humans have been asking
that question for a long time.
- Yeah, exactly.
So we're quite,
I guess we've developed
a lot of mechanisms
to cope with this.
- Yeah.
- These deep mysteries
that we can't fully,
we can see but we can't fully understand
and we have to just
get on with daily life.
- Yeah.
- And we keep ourselves busy, right?
In a way, did we keep
ourselves distracted?
- I mean weather is one of
the most important
questions of human history.
We still, that's the
go-to small talk direction
of the weather.
- Yes.
Especially in England, yeah.
- And then which is, you know,
famously is an extremely difficult system
to model.
- Yeah.
- And even that system,
Google DeepMind has made progress on.
- Yes, yeah, we've created
the best weather prediction
systems in the world
and they're better than
traditional fluid dynamics sort of systems
that usually calculated
on massive supercomputers,
takes days to calculate it.
We've managed to model a
lot of the weather dynamics
with neural network systems
with our WeatherNext system.
And again, it's interesting,
that those kinds of
dynamics can be modeled
even though they're very complicated,
almost bordering on chaotic
systems in some cases.
A lot of the interesting aspects of that
can be modeled by these
neural network systems.
Including very recently we had, you know,
cyclone prediction of where,
you know, paths of hurricanes might go.
Of course super useful, super
important for the world.
And it's super important to do that
very timely and very quickly
and as well as accurately.
And I think it's very
promising direction again of,
you know, simulating,
and so that you can run forward
predictions and simulations
of very complicated real world systems.
- I should mention that
I've gotten a chance in Texas to meet
a community of folks
called the storm chasers.
- [Demis] Yes.
- And what's really incredible about them,
I need to talk to them more,
is they're extremely tech-savvy
because what they have to do
is they have to use models
to predict where the storm is.
- Yeah.
- So it's this beautiful mix of
like crazy enough
- Yeah.
- to like go into the eye of the storm.
- Yeah.
- And like,
in order to protect your life
and predict where the extreme
events are going to be,
they have to have
increasingly sophisticated
models of weather.
- Yeah.
- Yeah.
It's a beautiful balance of like
being in it as living organisms
and the cutting edge of science.
So they actually might be
using DeepMind systems,
so that's.
- Yeah, hopefully they are.
And I love to join them
in one of those chases.
They look amazing, right?
- It's great.
- To actually experience it one time.
- Exactly.
- Yeah.
- And then also to experience
the correct prediction,
- Yeah, yeah.
- where something will come,
and how it's going to evolve.
It's incredible, yeah.
You've estimated that
we'll have AGI by 2030,
so there's interesting
questions around that.
How will we actually
know that we got there
and what may be the move,
quote, "Move 37" of AGI?
- My estimate is sort of 50% chance
by in the next five years.
So, you know, by 2030 let's say.
And so I think there's a good
chance that that could happen.
Part of it is what is
your definition of AGI,
of course people arguing about that now.
And mine's quite a high bar
and always has been of like,
can we match the cognitive
functions that the brain has?
Right, so we know our
brains are pretty much
general Turing machines, approximate.
And of course we created
incredible modern
civilization with our minds.
So that also speaks to
how general the brain is.
And for us to know we have a true AGI,
we would have to like make sure
that it has all those capabilities.
It isn't kind of a jagged intelligence
where some things it's really
good at like today's systems,
but other things it's really flawed at.
And that's what we currently
have with today's systems.
They're not consistent.
So you'd want that
consistency of intelligence
across the board.
And then we have some missing,
I think, capabilities,
like sort of the true invention
capabilities and creativity
that we were talking about earlier.
So you'd want to see those.
How you test that?
I think you just test it.
One way to do it would be
kind of brute force test of
tens of thousands of cognitive tasks that,
you know, we know that humans can do.
And maybe also make the system available
to a few hundred of the
world's top experts,
the Terrence Taos of each subject area,
and see if they can find, you know,
give them a month or two
and see if they can find an
obvious flaw in the system.
And if they can't,
then I think you are pretty, you know,
you can be pretty confident we
have a fully general system.
- Maybe to push back a little bit.
It seems like humans are really incredible
as the intelligence
improves across all domains
to take it for granted.
Like you mentioned, Terrence Tao,
these brilliant experts,
they might quickly in a span of weeks
take for granted all the
incredible things you can do
and then focus in well, aha, right there.
You know, I consider myself,
first of all, human.
- Yeah.
- I identify as human.
You know, some people listen
to me talk and they're like,
that guy is not good at talking,
the stuttering, you know.
So like even humans have
obvious across domains, limits,
even just outside of mathematics
and physics and so on.
I wonder if it will take
something like a move 37,
so on the positive side,
- Yeah.
- versus like a barrage
of 10,000 cognitive tasks.
- Yeah.
- where it'll be one or two
where it's like,
- Yes.
- holy shit, this is special.
- So I think there are.
Exactly.
So I think there's the
sort of blanket testing
to just make sure you've
got the consistency.
But I think there are the
sort of lighthouse moments
like the move 37 that
I would be looking for.
So one would be inventing
a new conjecture or a new
hypothesis about physics
like Einstein did.
So maybe you could even
run the back test of
that very rigorously.
Like have a cutoff, a
knowledge cutoff of 1900
and then give the system
everything that was,
you know, that was written up to 1900,
and then see if it could come up
with special relativity and
general relativity, right,
like Einstein did.
That would be an interesting test.
Another one would be, can
it invent a game like Go?
Not just come up with
move 37, a new strategy,
but can it invent a game that's as deep,
as aesthetically beautiful,
as elegant as Go?
And those are the sorts of things
I would be looking out for.
And probably a system being able to do
several of those things, right?
For it to be very general,
not just one domain.
And so I think that would
be the signs at least
that I would be looking for,
that we've got a system that's AGI level.
And then maybe to fill that out,
you would also check their consistency,
you know, make sure there's no
holes in that system either.
- Yeah, something like
a new conjecture or scientific discovery.
That would be a cool feeling.
- Yeah, that would be amazing.
So it's not just helping us do that,
but actually coming up
with something brand new.
- And you would be in the room for that.
- Absolutely.
- So it would be like
probably two or three
months before announcing it.
And you would just be sitting
there trying not to tweet.
- Something like that.
Exactly, it's like, what is this amazing,
- Yeah.
- you know, physics idea?
And then we would probably check it
with world experts in that domain.
- Yeah.
- Right.
And validate it and kind
of go through its workings,
and I guess it would be
explaining its workings too.
Yeah, it'd be an amazing moment.
- Do you worry that we as
humans, even expert humans,
like you might miss it?
- Well, it may be pretty complicated.
So it could be, the
analogy I give there is
I don't think it will
be totally mysterious
to the best human scientists,
but it may be a bit like,
for example, in chess,
if I was to talk to Garry
Kasparov or Magnus Carlson
and play a game with them
and they make a brilliant move,
I might not be able to
come up with that move,
but they could explain why
afterwards that move made sense.
And we would be to
understand it to some degree,
not to the level they do,
but in, you know, if they
were good at explaining,
which is actually part
of intelligence too,
is being able to explain in a simple way
what you're thinking about.
I think that that will be very possible
for the best human scientists.
- But I wonder, maybe you can
educate me on the side of Go,
I wonder if there's moves
from Magnus or Garry
where they at first will
dismiss it as a bad move.
- Yeah, sure.
It could be.
But then afterwards they'll
figure out with their intuition
that this is why this works.
And then empirically,
the nice thing about games is,
one of the great things about games is
it's a sort of scientific test.
Do you win the game or not win?
And then that tells you,
okay, that move in the end was good,
that strategy was good.
And then you can go back and analyze that
and explain even to yourself
a little bit more why explore around it.
And that's how chess analysis
and things like that works.
So perhaps that's why my
brain works like that.
'cause I've been doing
that since I was four.
And you're trained,
you know, it's sort of
hardcore training in that way.
- But even now, like when I generate code,
there is this kind of
nuanced, fascinating
contention that's happening
where I might at first identify
a set of generated code as incorrect
in some interesting nuanced ways.
But then I'm always have
to ask the question,
is there a deeper insight here
that I'm the one who's incorrect?
And that's going to,
as the systems get more
and more intelligent,
you're gonna have to contend with that.
It's like, what do you?
Is this a bug or a feature,
- Yeah.
- what you just came up with?
- Yeah, and they're gonna
be pretty complicated to do,
but of course it will be.
You can imagine also AI systems
that are producing that
code or whatever that is,
and then human program is looking at it,
but also not unaided with
the help of AI tools as well.
So it's gonna be kind of an interesting,
you know, maybe different
AI tools to the ones,
- Yeah.
- That they're more, you know,
kind of monitoring tools to
the ones that generated it.
- So if we look at AGI system,
sorry to bring it back up,
- Yeah.
- but AlphaEvolve, super cool.
So AlphaEvolve enables,
on the programming side,
something like recursive
self-improvement potentially.
Like if you can imagine
what that AGI system,
maybe not the first version,
but a few versions beyond that,
what does that actually look like?
Do you think it will be simple?
Do you think it'll be something like
a self-improving program and a simple one?
- I mean, potentially
that's possible I would say.
I'm not sure it's even desirable
because that's a kind of
like hard takeoff scenario.
- Yeah.
- But you,
these current systems like AlphaEvolve,
they have, you know,
human in the loop deciding
on various things,
their separate hybrid
systems that interact.
One could imagine eventually
doing that end-to-end.
I don't see why that wouldn't be possible.
But right now, you know,
I think the systems are
not good enough to do that
in terms of coming up with
the architecture of the code.
And again, it's a little bit
reconnected to this idea of
coming up with a new
conjecture hypothesis.
How like they're good if you give them
very specific instructions
about what you're trying to do.
But if you give them a very
vague high-level instruction
that wouldn't work currently.
And I think that's related
to this idea of like
invent a game as good as Go, right?
Imagine that was the prompt.
That's pretty underspecified.
And so the current systems wouldn't know,
I think what to do with that,
how to narrow that down
to something tractable.
And I think there's similar like,
look, just make a better
version of yourself.
That's too unconstrained.
But we've done it in, you know,
and as you know with AlphaEvolve like
things like faster matrix multiplication.
So when you hone it down
to very specific thing you want,
it's very good at
incrementally improving that.
But at the moment,
these are more like
incremental improvements,
sort of small iterations.
Whereas if, you know,
if you wanted a big leap in understanding,
you need a much larger advance.
- Yeah, but it could also be sort of
to push back against
hard takeoff scenario,
it could be just a sequence
of incremental improvements
like matrix multiplication.
Like it has to sit there for days
thinking how to
incrementally improve a thing
and that it does so recursively.
And as you do more and more
improvement, it'll slow down.
- Right.
- So there'll be like,
like the path to AGI won't be like,
it'll be a gradual improvement over time.
- Yes.
If it was just incremental improvements,
that's how it would look.
So the question is,
could it come up with a new leap like
the Transformers architecture?
- Yeah.
- Right, could it have
done that back in 2017,
when, you know, we did
it and Brain did it.
And it's not clear that these systems,
something AlphaEvolve
wouldn't be able to do
make such a big leap.
So for sure these systems are good.
We have systems I think that can do
incremental hill climbing.
And that's a kind of bigger question about
is that all that's needed from here
or do we actually need one or
two more big breakthroughs?
- And can the same kind of systems
provide the breakthroughs also?
So make it a bunch of S-curves.
Like incremental improvement,
but also every once in a while leaps.
- Yeah, I don't think anyone has systems
that can have shown unequivocally
those big leaps, right?
We have a lot of systems that do
the hill climbing of the S-curve
that you're currently on.
- Yeah, and that would be the move 37.
- Yeah, I think would be a
leap, something like that.
- Do you think the scaling
laws are holding strong
on the pre-training,
post-training test on compute?
Do you, on the flip side of that,
anticipate AI progress hitting a wall?
- We certainly feel
there's a lot more room
just in the scaling.
So actually all steps,
pre-training, post-training,
and infant time.
So there's sort of three scalings
that are happening concurrently.
And we, again, there it's about
how innovative you can be.
And we, you know,
we pride ourselves on having
the broadest and deepest research bench.
We have amazing, you know,
incredible researchers
and people like Noam Shazeer,
who, you know, came up with Transformers,
and Dave Silver, you know,
who led the AlphaGo project and so on.
And it's that research base means that
if some new breakthrough is required,
like an AlphaGo or Transformers,
I would back us to be
the place that does that.
So I'm actually quite like it
when the terrain gets harder, right?
Because then it veers
more from just engineering
to true research.
- Yeah.
- And you know, or
research plus engineering,
and that's our sweet spot.
And I think that's harder,
it's harder to invent things
than to, you know, fast follow.
And so, you know, we don't know.
I would say it's kind of 50/50
whether new things are needed
or whether the scaling
of the existing stuff
is gonna be enough.
And so in true kind of empirical fashion,
we are pushing both of
those as hard as possible.
The new blue sky ideas,
and you know, maybe about half
our resources are on that,
and then, and then scaling to the max
the current capabilities.
And we're still seeing some, you know,
fantastic progress on each
different version of Gemini.
- That's interesting the way you put it
in terms of the Deep bench,
that if progress towards AGI is
more than just scaling compute,
so the engineering side of the problem
and is more on the scientific side
where there's breakthroughs needed,
then you feel confident DeepMind as well,
Google DeepMind as well positioned to
- Yes.
- kick ass in that domain?
- Well, I mean if you look at
the history of the last
decade or 15 years,
- [Lex] Yeah.
- It's been, I mean, you know,
maybe, I don't know,
80-90% of the breakthroughs
that underpins modern
AI field today was from,
you know, originally,
Google Brain, Google
Research, and DeepMind.
So yeah, I would back that
to continue hopefully.
- So on the data side,
are you concerned about running
out of high-quality data,
especially high-quality human data?
- I'm not very worried about that,
partly because I think there's enough data
and it's been proven to get
the systems to be pretty good.
And this goes back to simulations again.
Do you have enough data
to make simulations
so that you can create more synthetic data
that are from the right distribution.
Obviously that's the key.
So you need enough real world data
in order to be able to create
those kinds of generators,
data generators.
And I think that we're at
that step at the moment.
- Yeah, you've done a
lot of incredible stuff
on the side of science and biology,
doing a lot with not so much data.
- [Demis] Yeah.
- I mean it's still a lot of data,
but I guess enough takeoff.
- Get that going.
Exactly, exactly.
- Yeah, yeah.
- How crucial is the scaling
of compute to building AGI?
This is a question that's
an engineering question,
it's almost a geopolitical question
because it also integrated into that is
supply chains and energy.
- Yes.
- A thing that you care a lot about,
which is potentially fusion.
- Yes.
- So innovating on
the side of energy also.
- Yeah.
- Do you think we're gonna
keep scaling compute?
- I think so, for several reasons.
I think compute,
there's the amount of compute
you have for training,
often it needs to be co-located.
So actually even like, you know,
bandwidth constraints between
data centers can affect that.
So there's additional
constraints even there.
And that's important for training
obviously the largest models you can.
But there's also,
because now AI systems are in products
and being used by billions
of people around the world,
you need a ton of inference compute now.
And then on top of that,
there's the thinking systems,
the new paradigm of the last year
that where they get smarter,
the longer amount of inference time
you give them at test time.
So all of those things
need a lot of compute
and I don't really see that slowing down.
And as AI systems become better,
they'll become more useful
and there'll be more demand for them.
So both from the training side,
the training side actually is
only just one part of that,
it may even become the
smaller part of what's needed
- [Lex] Yeah.
- in the overall compute
that that's required.
- Yeah, that's sort of
almost memey kind of thing,
which is like the success
and the incredible aspects of Veo 3.
People kind of make fun of like
the more successful it becomes the,
you know, the servers are sweating.
- Yes, exactly.
- 'Cause of the inference.
- Yeah, yeah, exactly.
We did a little video of the
servers frying eggs and things.
And that's right.
And we're gonna have to
figure out how to do that.
There's a lot of interesting
hardware innovations that we do.
As you know, we have our own TPU line.
And we are looking at like
inference-only things,
inference-only chips,
and how we can make those more efficient.
We're also very interested
in building AI systems
and we have done the
help with energy usage.
So help data center energy,
like for the cooling systems be efficient,
grid optimization,
and then eventually things like
helping with plasma
containment fusion reactors.
We've done lots of work on
that with Commonwealth Fusion.
And also one could imagine reactor design.
And then material design I think is
one of the most exciting.
New types of solar material,
solar panel material,
room temperature superconductors has
always been on my list
of dream breakthroughs,
and optimal batteries.
And I think a solution to any,
you know, one of those things would be
absolutely revolutionary for, you know,
climate and energy usage.
And we're probably close, you know,
and again, in the next five years,
to having AI systems
that can materially help
with those problems.
- If you were to bet,
sorry for the ridiculous question.
- Yeah.
- But what is
the main source of energy
in like 20, 30, 40 years?
Do you think it's gonna be nuclear fusion?
- I think fusion and solar are
the two that I would bet on.
Solar, I mean, you know,
it's the fusion reactor
in the sky of course.
And I think really the problem there is
batteries and transmission.
So you know, as well as more efficient,
more and more efficient solar material,
perhaps eventually, you know, in space.
You know, these kind of
Dyson sphere type ideas.
And fusion I think is
definitely doable seems
if we have the right design of reactor
and we can control the
plasma fast enough and so on.
I think both of those things
will actually get solved.
So we'll probably have at least
those are probably the
two primary sources of
renewable, clean, almost
free or perhaps free energy.
- What a time to be alive.
If I traveled into the future
with you 100 years from now,
how much would you be surprised
if we've passed a Type I
Kardashev scale civilization?
- I would not be that surprised
if there was a like a
100-year time scale from here.
I mean, I think it's pretty clear
if we crack the energy problems
in one of the ways we've just discussed,
fusion or very efficient solar,
then if energy is kind of
free and renewable and clean,
then that solves a whole
bunch of other problems.
So for example, the water
access problem goes away
because you can just use desalination.
We have the technology,
it's just too expensive.
So only, you know,
fairly wealthy countries
like Singapore and Israel and
so on like actually use it.
But if it was cheap,
then, you know, all countries
that have a coast could.
But also you'd have unlimited rocket fuel.
You could just separate sea water
out into hydrogen and oxygen using energy,
and that's rocket fuel.
So combined with, you know,
Elon's amazing self-landing rockets,
then it could be like sort of
like a bus service to space.
So that opens up, you know,
incredible new resources and domains.
Asteroid mining I think
will become a thing
and maximum human
flourishing to the stars.
That's what I dream about.
As well is like Carl
Sagan's sort of idea of
bringing consciousness to the universe,
waking up the universe.
And I think human
civilization will do that
in the full sense of
time if we get AI right
and crack some of these problems with it.
- Yeah, I wonder what it would look like
if you're just a tourist
flying through space,
you would probably notice Earth,
because if you solve the energy problem,
you would see a lot of
space rockets probably.
So it would be like
traffic here in London,
- Yeah.
- but in space.
- Yes, exactly.
- It's just a lot of rockets.
- [Demis] Yes.
- And then you would probably
see floating in space,
some kind of source of energy like solar
- Yeah.
- potentially.
So Earth would just look
more on the surface,
more technological.
And then you would use the
power of that energy then
to preserve the natural,
- Yes.
- like the rainforest
and all that kind of stuff.
- Exactly.
Because for the first
time in human history,
we wouldn't be resource constrained.
And I think that could be
amazing new era for humanity
where it's not zero sum, right?
I have this land, you don't have it.
Or if we take, you know,
if the tigers have their forest,
then the local villagers can't,
what are they gonna use?
I think that this will help a lot.
No, it won't solve all problems
because there's still other human foibles
that will still exist,
but it will at least remove one
I think one of the big vectors,
which is scarcity of resources,
you know, including land and
more materials and energy.
And you know,
we should be sometimes
call it like others call it
about this kind of radical abundance era
where there's plenty of
resources to go around,
of course, the next big
question is making sure that
that's fairly, you know, shared fairly,
and everyone in society
benefits from that.
- So there is something about
human nature where I go,
you know, it's like Borat,
like my neighbor, like you start trouble.
We do start conflicts.
And that's why games throughout
as I'm learning actually more and more
even in ancient history,
serve the purpose of pushing
people away from war.
- Yes.
- Actually the hot war.
So maybe we can figure out
increasingly sophisticated
video games that pull us,
that give us that
scratch the itch of like
- Yeah.
- conflict whatever that is,
but us, the human nature.
And then avoid the actual
hot wars that would come with
increasingly sophisticated technologies
because we're now long past the stage
where the weapons we're able to create
can actually just destroy
all of human civilization.
- Yeah.
- So it's no longer,
that's no longer a great way
to start shit with your neighbor.
It is better to play a game of chess.
- Or football?
- Or football.
- Yeah.
- Yeah.
- And I think, I mean,
I think that's what my modern sport is.
And I love football, watching it.
And I just feel like, and I
used to play it a lot as well,
it's very visceral and it's tribal
and I think it does channel a
lot of those energies into a,
which I think is a kind of human need
to belong to some group,
but into a fun way, a healthy way,
and not a destructive way
kind of constructive thing.
And I think going back to games again is
I think they're originally
why they're so great
as well for kids to play
things like chess is
they're great little microcosm
simulations of the world.
They're simulations of the world too.
They're simplified versions
of some real world situation,
whether it's poker or Go or chess.
Different aspects or diplomacy.
Different aspects of the real world.
And it allows you to practice at them too.
And 'cause you know,
how many times do you get to practice
a massive decision moment in your life?
You know, what job to take,
what university to go to?
You know, you get maybe, I don't know,
a dozen or so key
decisions one has to make
and you've got to make
those as best as you can.
And games is a kind of safe environment,
repeatable environment,
where you can get better at
your decision making process.
And it maybe has this
additional benefit of
channeling some energies
into more creative and
constructive pursuits.
- Well, I think it's also
really important to practice
losing and winning.
- Right.
- Like losing is a really, you know,
that's why I love games,
that's why I love even things
like Brazilian jiujitsu.
- [Demis] Yeah.
- Where you can get your kicked
in a safe environment over and over.
It reminds you about
the way about physics,
about the way the world works,
about that sometimes you
lose, sometimes you win,
you can still be friends with everybody.
- Yeah.
- That feeling of losing,
I mean it's a weird one
for us humans to like
really like make sense of like,
that's just part of life,
that is a fundamental
part of life is losing.
- Yeah and I think in martial
arts as I understand it,
but also in things like chess is,
at least the way I took it,
it's a lot to do with
self-improvement, self-knowledge,
you know, that, okay, so I did this thing.
It's not about really
being the other person,
it's about maximizing your own potential.
If you do in a healthy way,
you learn to use victory
and losses in a way.
Don't get carried away with victory
and think you're just
the best in the world.
And the losses keep you humble
and always knowing there's
always something more to learn.
There's always a bigger
expert that can mentor you.
You know, I think you learn that
I'm pretty sure in martial arts,
and I think that's also the way
that least I was trained in chess.
And so in the same way.
And it can be very hardcore
and very important.
And of course you wanna win,
but you also need to learn
how to deal with setbacks
in a healthy way.
And wire that feeling that you
have when you lose something
into a constructive thing of
next time I'm gonna improve this, right,
or get better at this.
- There is something that's
a source of happiness,
a source of meaning,
that improvement step.
It's not about the winning or losing.
- Yes, the mastery.
- Yeah.
- There's nothing more
satisfying in a way.
It's like, oh wow,
this thing I couldn't
do before, now I can.
And again games and physical
sports and mental sports,
they're ways of measuring
they're beautiful
because you can measure that progress,
right?
- Yeah.
I mean there's something about
I guess why I love role playing games.
Like the number go up of like my,
- Yes.
- on the skill tree.
Like literally that is a source
of meaning for us humans.
Whatever our-
- Yeah.
We're quite addicted
to this sort of, yeah.
These numbers going up.
- Yeah.
- And maybe that's why
we made games like that.
- Yeah.
- 'Cause obviously that is something
we're hill climbing
systems ourselves, right?
- Yeah, it would be quite sad
if we didn't have,
- Yeah.
- any mechanism.
- Different colored belts.
We do this everywhere, right?
Where we just have this thing, it's great.
- And I don't wanna dismiss that,
that there is a source of deep meaning
across humans.
- Yeah.
- So one of the incredible
stories on the business,
on the leadership side is
what Google has done over the past year.
So I think it's fair to
say that Google was losing
on the LLM product side a
year ago with Gemini 1.5
and now it's winning with Gemini 2.5.
And you took the helm
and you led this effort.
What did it take to go from let's say,
quote, unquote, "losing"
to quote, unquote, "winning"
in a span of a year?
- Yeah, well firstly,
it's absolutely incredible
team that we have,
you know, led by Koray
and Jeff Dean and Oriol
and the amazing team we have on Gemini,
absolutely world class.
So you can't do it
without the best talent.
And of course you have, you know,
we have a lot of great compute as well.
But then it's the research
culture we've created, right?
And basically coming together,
both different groups in Google,
you know, there was Google
Brain, a world-class team,
and then the old DeepMind.
And pulling together all the
best people and the best ideas
and gathering around
to make the absolute
greater system we could.
And it has been hard,
but we're all very competitive.
And we, you know, love research.
It's just so fun to do.
And we, you know, it's
great to see our trajectory.
It wasn't a given,
but we're very pleased with where we are
and the rate of progress is
the most important thing.
So if you look at where we've
come to from two years ago
to one year ago to now, you know,
I think our, we call
it relentless progress
along with relentless
shipping of that progress
is being very successful.
And, you know, it's
unbelievably competitive,
the whole space, the whole AI space,
with some of the greatest entrepreneurs
and leaders and companies in the world,
all competing now because
everyone's realized
how important AI is.
And it's very, you know,
been pleasing for us to see that progress.
- You know, Google's a gigantic company.
Can you speak to the natural things
that happen in that case?
Is the bureaucracy that emerges,
like you wanna be careful like, you know,
like the natural kind of there's meetings
and there's managers and that.
- Yeah.
- Like what are some of the challenges
from a leadership perspective
breaking through that
in order to like you said ship
like the number of products.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Gemini-related products
that's been shipped over the
past years is just insane.
- Right, it is.
Yeah, exactly.
That's what relentlessness looks like.
I think it's a question
of like any big company,
you know, ends up having a
lot of layers of management
and things like that is sort
of the nature of how it works.
But I still operate and
I was always operating
with old DeepMind as a startup still.
A large one, but still as a startup.
And that's what we still act like today
as with Google DeepMind.
And acting with decisiveness
and the energy that you get
from the best smaller organizations.
And we try to get the best of both worlds
where we have this incredible
billions of users surfaces,
incredible products that we can power up
with our AI and our research.
And that's amazing.
And you can, you know,
there's very few places in
the world you can get that,
do incredible world-class
research on the one hand
and then plug it in
and improve billions of
people's lives the next day.
That's a pretty amazing combination.
And we're continually fighting
and cutting away bureaucracy
to allow the research culture
and the relentless shipping
culture to flourish.
And I think we've got
a pretty good balance,
whilst being responsible with it,
you know, as you have
to be as a large company
and also with a number of, you know,
huge products surfaces that we have.
- So a funny thing you
mentioned about like,
the surface of the billion.
I had a conversation with a guy named,
a brilliant guy
here at the British Museum
called Irving Finkel.
He's a world expert at cuneiforms,
which is ancient writing
on tablets.
- Yeah.
- And he doesn't know
about ChatGPT or Gemini.
He doesn't even know anything about AI.
But his first encounter with this AI is
AI mode on Google.
- Yes, yes.
- He's like, is that what
you're talking about,
- Yes.
- this AI mode?
And then, you know,
it's just a reminder that
there's a large part of the world
that doesn't know about this AI thing.
- Yeah, I know.
It's funny 'cause if you
live on X and Twitter,
and I mean, it's sort of at
least my feed, it's all AI.
And there's certain
places where, you know,
in the Valley and certain
pockets where everyone's just,
all they're thinking about is AI.
But a lot of the normal world
hasn't come across it yet.
- And that's a great responsibility,
their first interaction.
- Yup.
- The grand scale of the rural India
or anywhere across the world,
like you get to.
- Right, right.
And you want it to be as good as possible.
And in a lot of cases it's
just under the hood powering,
making something like maps
or search work better.
And it's ideally for a lot of those people
should just be seamless.
It's just new technology
that makes their lives more,
you know, productive and helps them.
- A bunch of folks on
the Gemini product and engineering teams
spoken extremely highly of
you on another dimension
that I almost didn't even expect,
'cause I kind of think of you
as the like deep scientists
and caring about these big
research scientific questions.
But they also said you're
a great product guy.
Like how to create a thing
that a lot of people
would use and enjoy using.
So can you maybe speak to what it takes
to create AI-based product that
a lot of people enjoy using?
- Yeah, well I mean, again,
that comes back from my game design days
where I used to design games
for millions of gamers.
People would forget about that.
I've had experience with
cutting-edge technology in product
that is how games was in the '90s.
And so I love actually
the combination of cutting-edge research
and then being applied in a product
to power a new experience.
And so I think it's the same
skill really of, you know,
imagining what it would be
like to use it viscerally
and having good taste
coming back to earlier.
The same thing that's useful in science
I think can also be
useful in product design.
And I've just had a very, you know,
always been a sort of
multidisciplinary person.
So I don't see the
boundaries really between,
you know, arts and sciences
or product and research.
It's a continuum for me.
I mean, I only work on,
I like working on products
that are cutting edge.
I wouldn't be able to, you know,
have cutting-edge
technology under the hood.
I wouldn't be excited about them
if they were just
run-of-the-mill products.
So it requires this invention
creativity capability.
- What are some specific things
you kind of learned about
when you, even on the LLM side,
you're interacting with Gemini,
you're like this doesn't feel like
the layout, the interface,
- Yeah.
- maybe the trade
opportunity, the latency.
Like how to present to
the user how long to wait
and how that waiting is shown
or the reasoning capabilities?
There some interesting things.
'Cause like you said,
it's very cutting edge,
we don't know
- Yeah.
- how to present it correctly.
So is there some specific
things you've learned?
- I mean it's such a false evolving space.
We're evaluating this all the time.
But where we are today is that
you want to continually simplify things.
Whether that's the interface,
- Simplify, yeah.
- or what you build on top of the model.
You kind of wanna get out
of the way of the model.
The model train is coming down the track
and it's improving unbelievably fast.
This relentless progress
we talked about earlier.
You know, you look at 2.5 versus 1.5
and it's just a gigantic improvement.
And we expect that again
for the future versions.
And so the models are
becoming more capable.
So the interesting thing about
the design space in today's world,
these AI-first products is,
you've got to design not for
what the thing can do today,
the technology can do today,
but in a year's time.
So you actually have to be a
very technical product person
because you've got to kind of have
a good intuition for and feel for,
okay, that thing that
I'm dreaming about now
can't be done today,
but is the research track on schedule
to basically intercept that in
six months or a year's time?
So you kind of got to intercept
where this highly changing
technology's going.
As well as the new capabilities are
coming online all the time,
that you didn't realize
before that can allow
like deep research to work.
Or now we've got video generation,
what do we do with that?
This multimodal stuff,
you know, one question I have is,
is it really going to be the
current UI that we have today?
These text box chats seems very unlikely
once you think about these
super multimodal systems.
Shouldn't it be something
more like "Minority Report"
where you're sort of vibing with it
in a kind of collaborative way, right?
It seems very restricted today.
I think we'll look back
on today's interfaces
and products and systems as quite archaic
in maybe in just a couple of years.
So I think there's a lot of space actually
for innovation to happen
on the product side
as well as the research side.
- And then we are offline
talking about the keyboard,
the open question is how, when,
and how much will we move to audio
as the primary way of interacting
with the machines around
us versus typing stuff.
- Yeah, I mean typing is a very
low bandwidth way of doing,
even if you're a very
fast, you know, typer.
And I think we are gonna have
to start utilizing other devices,
whether that's smart glasses,
you know, audio earbuds,
and eventually maybe some
sorts of neural devices
where we can increase the
input and the output bandwidth
to something, you know,
maybe 100X of what is today.
- I think that, you know,
underappreciated art form
is the interface design
because I think you can not unlock
the power of the intelligence of a system
if you don't have the right interface.
The interface is really the way
you unlock its power.
- Yeah.
- It's such an interesting
question of how to do that.
- Yeah.
- So how.
You would think like
getting out of the way
isn't real art form.
- Yes.
You know, it's the sort of thing
that I guess Steve Jobs
always talked about, right?
It's simplicity, beauty, and
elegance that we want, right?
And nobody's there yet, in my opinion.
And that's what I would like us to get to.
Again, it sort of speaks to
like Go again, right, as a game,
the most elegant, beautiful game.
Can you, you know,
can you make an interface
as beautiful as that?
And actually I think
we're gonna enter an era
of AI-generated interfaces
that are probably personalized to you.
So it fits the way that
your aesthetic, your feel,
the way that your brain works.
And the AI kind of generates that
depending on the task, you know.
That feels like that's probably
the direction we'll end up in.
- Yeah, 'cause some people are power users
and they want every single parameter
on the screen.
- Right.
- And everything based
like perhaps me with
a keyboard-based navigation.
- Yeah.
- I'd like to have
shortcuts for everything.
And some people like the minimalism.
- Just hide all of that complexity.
Yeah, exactly.
- Completely.
Yeah.
Well, I'm glad you have a
Steve Jobs mode in you as well.
This is great.
Einstein mode, Steve Jobs mode.
All right, let me try to trick you
into answering a question.
When will Gemini 3.0 come out?
Is it before or after GTA VI?
The world waits for both.
And what does it take
to go from 2.5 to 3.0?
Because it seems like
there's been a lot of releases of 2.5,
which are already leaps in performance.
So what does it even mean
to go to a new version?
Is it about performance?
Is it about a complete different
flavor of an experience?
- Yeah, well so the way it works
with our different version numbers is,
you know, we try to collect,
so maybe it takes, you know,
roughly six months or something
to do a new kind of full run
and the full productization
of a new version.
And during that time,
lots of new interesting research,
iterations, and ideas come up.
And we sort of collect them all together.
You know, you could imagine
the last six months worth of
interesting ideas on
the architecture front.
Maybe it's on the data front,
it's like many different possible things.
And we collect, package that all up,
test which ones are likely to be useful
for the next iteration,
and then bundle that all together.
And then we start the new,
you know, giant hero training run, right?
And then of course that gets monitored.
And then at the end of the pre-training,
then there's all the post-training,
there's many different ways of doing that,
different ways of patching it.
So there's a whole
experimenting phase there,
which you can also get a lot of gains out.
And that's where you see
the version numbers usually are
referring to the base model,
the pre-train model.
And then the interim
versions of 2.5, you know,
and the different sizes and
the different little additions,
they're often patches
or post-training ideas
that can be done afterwards
off the same basic architecture.
And then of course on top of that,
we also have different sizes,
Pro and Flash and Flash-Lite.
that are often distilled
from the biggest ones.
You know, the Flash
model from the Pro model.
And that means we have a
range of different choices
if you are the developer of
do you wanna prioritize
performance or speed, right,
and cost?
And we like to think of
this Pareto frontier of,
you know, on the one hand the y-axis is,
you know, like performance,
and then the x-axis is,
you know, cost or latency
and speed basically.
And we have models that
completely define the frontier.
So whatever your trade off is
that you want as an individual
user or as a developer,
you should find one of our
models satisfies that constraint.
- So behind the version changes
there is a big hero run.
- Yes.
- And then,
there's just an insane
complexity of productization,
then there's the distillation of
the different sizes
along that Pareto front.
And then with each step you take,
you realize there might be a cool product.
There's side quests.
- Yes, exactly.
- And then you also don't want
to take too many side quests
because then you have a million versions
and a million products.
- Yes, yes, precisely.
- It's very unclear.
- Yeah.
- But you also get super excited
'cause it's super cool.
- Yup.
- Like how does, even
when you look at Veo,
it's very cool.
- Yeah.
- How does it fit into the bigger thing?
- Yes, exactly.
- Yeah.
- Exactly, and then you're constantly
this process of converging
upstream, we call it,
you know, ideas from the product surfaces
or from the post-training.
And even further downstream than that,
you kind of upstream that
into the core model training
for the next run.
Right, so then the main model,
the main Gemini track becomes
more and more general.
And eventually, you know, AGI.
- One hero run at a time.
- Yes, exactly.
- A few hero runs later.
- Yeah.
So sometimes when you
release these new versions
or every version really,
are benchmarks productive
or counterproductive
for showing the performance of a model?
- You need them,
but it's important that you
don't over fit to them, right?
So there shouldn't be the end
or the be-all and end-all.
So there's LM Arena
or it used to be called LMSYS,
that's one of them that turned
out sort of organically to be
one of the main ways people
like to test these systems,
at least the chatbots.
Obviously there's loads
of academic benchmarks
from that test,
mathematics and coding ability,
general language ability,
science ability, and so on.
And then we have our
own internal benchmarks
that we care about.
It's a kind of multiobjective,
you know, optimization problem, right?
You don't want to be
good at just one thing.
We're trying to build general systems
that are good across the board.
And you try and make
no regret improvements.
So where you're improving
- Yeah.
- like, you know, coding,
but it doesn't reduce your performance
in other areas, right?
So that's the hard part.
'Cause you can, of course,
you could put more coding
data in or you could put more,
I don't know, gaming data in,
but then does it make
worse your language system
or in your translation systems
and other things that you care about?
So you've got to kind of
continually monitor this
increasingly larger and
larger suite of benchmarks.
And also there's,
when you stick them into
products, these models,
you also care about the direct
usage and the direct stats
and the signals that you're
getting from the end users.
Whether they're coders
or the average person
using the chat interfaces.
- Yeah, because ultimately you
wanna measure the usefulness,
but it's so hard to
convert that into a number.
- Right.
- It's really
vibe-based benchmarks
- Yes.
- across a large number of users,
and it's hard to know.
And it would be just terrifying to me to,
you know you have a much smarter model,
but it's just something vibe-based.
It's not quite working.
That's just scary.
And everything you just said,
it has to be smart and useful
across so many domains.
So you get super excited
'cause it's all of a sudden
solving programming problems
that never been able to solve before,
but now it's crappy at
poetry or something.
- Yes, right.
- And it's just, I don't know.
That's a stressful.
That's so difficult.
- To balance, yeah.
- To balance.
And because you can't
really trust the benchmarks,
you really have to trust the end users.
- Yeah.
And then other things
that even more esoteric
come into play like,
you know, the style of
the persona of the system,
you know, how it, you know.
Is it verbose?
Is it succinct?
Is it humorous, you know?
And different people
like different things.
- Yeah.
- So, you know,
it's very interesting.
It's almost like cutting-edge
part of psychology research
or personality research.
You know, I used to do that in my PhD,
like five-factor personality.
What do we actually want
our systems to be like?
And different people will
like different things as well.
So these are all just sort of
new problems in product space
that I don't think have ever
really been tackled before.
But we're gonna sort of
rapidly have to deal with now.
- I think it's a super fascinating space,
developing the character of the thing.
- [Demis] Yeah.
- And so doing, it puts
a mirror to ourselves.
What are the kind of things that we like?
'Cause prompt engineering
allows you to control
a lot of those elements,
but can the product make it easier for you
to control the different
flavors of those experiences,
the different characters
that you interact with?
- Yeah, exactly so.
- So what's the probability
of Google DeepMind winning?
- Well, I don't see it sort of winning.
I mean I think we need to,
I think winning is the
wrong way to look at it
given how important and consequential
what it is we're building.
So funnily enough,
I try not to view it like
a game or competition,
even though that's a lot of my mindset.
It's about, in my view,
all of us have, those of
us at the leading edge,
have a responsibility
to steward this unbelievable technology
that could be used for incredible good
but also has risks,
steward it safely into the world
for the benefit of humanity.
That's always what I've dreamed about
and what we've always tried to do.
And I hope that's what
eventually the community,
maybe the international
community will rally around
when it becomes obvious as we
get closer and closer to AGI,
that that's what's needed.
- I agree with you.
I think that's beautifully put.
You've said that you talk to
and are on good terms with
the leads of some of these labs.
As the competition heats up,
how hard is it to maintain
sort of those relationships?
- It's been okay so far.
I try to pride myself
in being collaborative.
I'm a collaborative person.
Research is a collaborative endeavor.
Science is a collaborative
endeavor, right?
It's all good for humanity in the end.
If you cure, you know, terrible diseases
and you come with an incredible cure,
this is net win for humanity.
And the same with energy.
All of the things that I'm interested in
in helping solve with AI.
So I just want that technology
to exist in the world
and be used for the right things
and the kind of the benefits of that,
the productivity benefits
of that being shared
for the benefit of everyone.
So I try to maintain good relations
with all the leading lab people.
They're very interesting
characters many of them
as you might expect.
- Yeah.
- But yeah, I'm on good terms
I hope with pretty much all of them.
And I think that's gonna be important
when things get even more
serious than they are now,
that there are those
communication channels
and that's what will facilitate
cooperation or collaboration
if that's what is required
especially on things like safety.
- Yeah, I hope there's
some collaboration on stuff
that's sort of less high stakes.
And in so doing sort of as a mechanism
for maintaining friendships
and relationships.
So for example, I think
the internet would love it
if you and Elon somehow collaborate
on creating a video game,
that kind of thing.
- Right.
- That I think that enables
camaraderie in good terms.
And also you two are legit gamers,
so it's just fun to,
- Yeah.
- fun to create something.
- Yeah, that would be awesome.
And we've talked about that in the past
and it may be a cool thing
that, you know, we can do.
And I agree with you.
It'd be nice to have kind
of side projects in a way
where one can just lean into
the collaboration aspect of it
and it's a sort of a
win-win for both sides.
And it kind of builds up
that collaborative muscle.
- I see the scientific endeavor
as that kind of side project
for humanity.
- Yeah.
- And I think Google DeepMind
has been really pushing that.
I would love to see other labs
do more scientific stuff
and then collaborate.
'Cause it just seems like
easier to collaborate
on the big scientific questions.
- I agree, and I would love
to see a lot of people,
a lot of the other labs
talk about science,
but I think,
we are really the only ones,
- Yeah.
- using it for science and doing that.
And that's why projects like AlphaFold
are so important to me.
And I think to our mission
is to show how AI can,
you know, be clearly used
in a very concrete way
for the benefit of humanity.
And also we spun out
companies like Isomorphic
off the back of AlphaFold
to do drug discovery
and it's going really well.
And build sort of, you know,
you can think of build
additional AlphaFold type systems
to go into chemistry space to
help accelerate drug design.
And the examples I think we need to show
and society needs to understand are
where AI can bring these huge benefits.
- Well, from the bottom of my heart,
thank you for pushing the
scientific efforts forward
with rigor, with fun,
with humility, all of it.
I just love to see it,
and still talking about P equals NP
I mean it is just incredible.
So I love it.
There's been seemingly a war for talent.
Some of it is meme, I don't know.
What do you think about
Meta buying up talent with huge salaries
and the heating up of
this battle for talent?
And I should say that I think
a lot of people see DeepMind
as a really great place
to do cutting-edge work
for the reasons that you've outlined.
- Yeah.
- Like there's this
vibrant scientific culture.
- Yeah, well, look, of course, you know,
there's a strategy that
Meta is taking right now,
I think that from my perspective at least,
I think the people that are real believers
in the mission of AGI and what it can do
and understand the real consequences,
both good and bad from that
and what that responsibility entails,
I think they're mostly
doing it to be like myself,
to be on the frontier of that research.
So, you know,
they can help influence the way that goes
and steward that technology
safely into the world.
And, you know, Meta right
now are not at the frontier.
Maybe they'll manage to get back on there.
And you know, it's probably rational
what they're doing from their perspective
because they're behind and
they need to do something.
But I think there's more
important things than just money.
Of course one has to
pay, you know, people,
their market rates and all of these things
and that continues to go up.
But, and I was expecting this,
because more and more
people are finally realizing
leaders of companies,
what I've always known
for 30 plus years now,
which is that AGI is the
most important technology
probably that's ever gonna be invented.
So in some sense it's
rational to be doing that.
But I also think there's
a much bigger question.
I mean, people in AI these
days are very well paid.
You know, I remember when we
were starting out back in 2010,
you know, I didn't even pay
myself a couple of years
because it wasn't enough money,
we couldn't raise any money.
And these days interns
are being paid, you know,
the amount that we raised as
our first entire seed round.
So it's pretty funny.
And I remember the days
where I used to have to work for free
and almost pay my own way
to do an internship, right?
Now it's all the other way around.
But that's just how it is.
It's the new world.
But I think that, you know,
we've been discussing
like what happens post AGI
and energy systems are solved and so on,
what is even money going to mean?
So I think, you know,
and the economy,
and we're gonna have much
bigger issues to work through
and how does the economy
function in that world,
and companies.
So I think, you know,
it's a little bit of a side issue
about salaries and things
of like that today.
- Yeah when you're facing
such gigantic consequences
and gigantic fascinating
scientific questions.
- Right.
Which may be only a few years away so.
- So on the practical
sort of pragmatic sense,
if we zoom in on jobs,
we can look at programmers
because it seems like
AI systems are currently doing
incredibly well at programming
and increasingly so.
So a lot of people that
program for a living,
love programming are worried
they will lose their jobs.
How worried should they be, do you think?
And what's the right way
to sort of adjust to the new reality
and ensure that you survive
and thrive as a human
in the programming world?
- Well, it's interesting that programming,
and it's again,
counterintuitive to what
we thought years ago maybe,
that some of the skills that
we think of as harder skills
are turned out maybe to be the easier ones
for various reasons.
But, you know, coding and math
because you can create
a lot of synthetic data
and verify if that data's correct.
So because of that nature of that,
it's easier to make things
like synthetic data to train from.
It's also an area, of course,
we're all interested in,
'cause as programmers, right,
to help us and get faster
at it and more productive.
So I think for the next era,
like the next five, 10 years,
I think what we're gonna find
is people who are kind of
embrace these technologies
become almost at one with them.
Whether that's in the creative industries
or the technical industries
will become sort of
superhumanly productive I think.
So the great programs will be even better,
but there'll be even 10X
even what they are today.
And because there,
you'll be able to use their skills
to utilize the tools to the maximum,
you know, exploit them to the maximum.
And so I think that's what we're gonna see
in the next domain.
So that's gonna cause quite
a lot of change, right?
And so that's coming.
A lot of people benefit from that.
So I think one example of that is
if coding becomes easier,
it becomes available to many
more creatives to do more.
But I think the top programmers
will still have huge advantages
as terms of specifying,
going back to specifying what
the architecture should be,
the question should be,
how to guide these coding
assistants in a way that's useful,
you know, check whether the
code they produce is good.
So I think there's
plenty of headroom there
for the foreseeable, you
know, next few years.
- So I think there's several
interesting things there.
One is there's a lot of imperative
to just get better and
better consistently of
using these tools.
So they're like riding the wave of
the improving models,
- Yes.
- versus like competing against them.
- Yes.
- But sadly,
because the nature of life on Earth,
there could be a huge amount of value
to certain kinds of
programming at the cutting edge
and less value to other kinds.
For example, it could be like, you know,
frontend web design might
be more amenable to,
as you mentioned, to
generation by AI systems.
And maybe for example, game engine design
or something like this,
- Yeah.
- or backend design,
or guiding systems in
high-performance situations,
high-performance programming
type of design decisions,
that might be extremely valuable.
But it will shift,
- Yeah.
- where the humans are needed most.
And that's scary for people
to address.
- Yeah, I think that's right.
Anytime where there's a lot
of disruption and change,
you know, and we've had this,
it is not just this time,
we've had this many times in human history
with the internet, mobile,
but before that obviously
industrial revolution.
And it's gonna be one of those eras
where there will be a lot of change.
I think there'll be new jobs
we can't even imagine today
just like the internet created.
And then those people
with the right skill sets
to ride that wave will become
incredibly valuable, right,
those skills.
But maybe people will have to
relearn or adapt a bit
their current skills.
And the thing that's gonna
be harder to deal with
this time around is that
I think what we're gonna see is
something like probably 10 times
the impact the industrial revolution had
but 10 times faster as well, right?
So instead of a hundred
years, it takes 10 years.
And so that's gonna make it, you know,
it's like 100X the impact
and the speed combined.
So that's what's I think gonna make it
more difficult for society to deal with.
And there's a lot to think through
and I think we need to be
discussing that right now.
And, I, you know,
encourage top economists in
the world and philosophers
to start thinking about
how is society gonna be affected by this
and what should we do?
Including things like, you know,
universal basic provision
or something like that
where a lot of the increased productivity
gets shared out and distributed to society
and maybe in the form of surface
services and other things,
where if you want more than that,
you still go and get some
incredibly rare skills
and things like that,
and make yourself unique,
but there's a basic
provision that is provided.
- And if you think of
government as a technology,
there's also interesting questions,
not just in the economics
but just politics.
How do you design a
system that's responding
to the rapidly changing times
such that you can represent
the different pain
that people feel from
the different groups?
And how do you reallocate resources
in a way that addresses that pain
and represents the hope and the pain
and the fears of different people
in a way that doesn't lead to division?
'Cause politicians are
often really good at
sort of fueling the division
and using that to get elected.
Defining the other and then saying,
that's bad.
- Yeah.
- And sort of based on that,
I think that's often counterproductive
to leveraging a rapidly
changing technology,
how to help the world flourish.
So we almost need to improve
our political systems as well rapidly,
if you think of them as a technology.
- Definitely.
And I think we'll need
new governance structures,
institutions probably,
to help with this transition.
So I think political philosophy
and political science
is gonna be key to that.
But I think the number
one thing, first of all,
that is to create more
abundance of resources, right?
So that's the number one thing,
increase productivity, get more resources,
maybe eventually get out
of the zero-sum situation.
Then the second question is
how to use those resources and
distribute those resources.
But yeah,
you can't do that without
having that abundance first.
- You mentioned to me
the book "The Maniac" by Benjamin Labatut,
a book on, first of all, about you,
there's a bio about you.
- It's strange, yeah.
- It's unclear, yes, sure.
It's unclear how much is
fiction, how much is reality.
But I think the central figure
that is John von Neumann.
I would say it's a haunting and beautiful
exploration of madness and genius
and let's say the double-edged
sword of discovery.
And you know, for people who don't know,
John von Neumann is a
kind of legendary mind.
He contributed to quantum mechanics.
He was on the Manhattan Project.
He is widely considered to
be the father of or pioneer
the modern computer and AI and so on.
Many people say he's like one
of the smartest humans ever,
which is fascinating.
And what's also fascinating is that
as a person who saw
nuclear science and physics
become the atomic bomb,
so you got to see ideas become a thing
that has a huge amount
of impact on the world,
he also foresaw the same
thing for computing.
- [Demis] Yeah.
- And that's the a little bit,
again, beautiful and
haunting aspect of the book.
Then taking a leap forward
and looking at this at
least at all, AlphaZero,
AlphaGo, AlphaZero big moment
that maybe John von Neumann's thinking
was brought to reality.
So I guess the question
is what do you think
if you got to hang out
with John von Neumann now,
what would he say about what's going on?
- Well, that would be
an amazing experience.
You know, he is a fantastic mind.
And I also love the way
he spent a lot of his time
at Princeton at the Institute
of Advanced Studies,
a very special place for thinking.
And it's amazing how
much of a polymath he was
and the spread of things he helped invent,
including of course the
Von Neumann architecture
that all the modern
computers are based on.
And he had amazing foresight.
I think he would've
loved where we are today.
And he would've,
I think he would've really
enjoyed AlphaGo being a,
you know, a game.
- Yes.
- He also did game theory.
I think he foresaw a
lot of what would happen
with learning machines systems
that are kind of grown
I think he called it
rather than programmed.
I'm not sure how even
maybe he wouldn't even be that surprised.
There's the fruition of what
I think he already foresaw
in the 1950s.
- I wonder what advice he would give.
He got to see the building
of the atomic bomb
with the Manhattan Project.
- Yeah.
- I'm sure there's interesting stuff
that maybe is not talked about enough.
Maybe some bureaucratic aspect,
maybe the influence of politicians,
maybe not enough of picking up the phone
and talking to people
that are called enemies
by the said politicians.
There might be some like deep wisdom
that we just may have lost
from that time actually.
- Yeah, I'm sure.
I'm sure there is.
I mean, I've you know, studied,
I read a lot of books
at that time as a well,
chronicle time,
and some brilliant people involved.
But I agree with you.
I think maybe there needs
to be more dialogue and understanding.
I hope we can learn from those times.
I think the difference here
is that the AI has so many,
it's a multi-use technology.
Obviously we're trying to do things like
solve, you know, all diseases,
help with energy and scarcity,
these incredible things,
this is why all of us
and myself, you know,
I worked started on this
journey 30 plus years ago.
But of course there are risks too.
And probably Von Neumann,
my guess is he foresaw both.
And I think he sort of said,
I think it to his wife that it would be,
that computers would be even
more impactful in the world.
And as we just discussed,
you know, I think that's right.
I think it's gonna be 10 times at least
of the industrial revolution.
So I think he's right.
So I think he would've been,
I imagine, fascinated by where we are now.
- And I think one of the,
maybe you can correct me,
but one of the takeaways
from the book is that
reason as said in the book,
mad dreams of reason,
it's not enough for guiding humanity
as we build these super
powerful technology
that there's something else.
I mean, there's also like
a religious component.
Whatever God, whatever religion gives,
it pulls us something in the human spirit
that raw cold reason doesn't give us.
- And I agree with that.
I think we need to approach it
with whatever you wanna call it,
a spiritual dimension
or humanist dimension,
it doesn't have to be to
do with religion, right?
But this idea of a soul,
what makes us human,
the spark that we have,
perhaps it's to do with consciousness
when we finally understand that,
I think that has to be at
the heart of the endeavor.
And technology,
I've always seen technology
as the enabler, right?
The tools that enable us to flourish
and to understand more about the world.
And I'm sort of with Feynman on this,
and he used to always talk about
science and art being companions, right?
You can understand it from both sides,
the beauty of a flower,
how beautiful it is.
And also understand why
the colors of the flower
evolve like that, right?
That just makes it more beautiful,
just the intrinsic beauty of the flower.
And I've always sort of seen it like that.
And maybe, you know,
in the Renaissance times
the great discoverers then,
people like Da Vinci, you know,
I don't think he saw any
difference between science and art,
and perhaps religion, right?
Everything was, it's
just part of being human
and being inspired about
the world around us.
And that's the philosophy I tried to take.
And one of my favorite
philosophers is Spinoza.
And I think he combined
that all very well.
You know, this idea of trying
to understand the universe
and understanding our place in it.
And that was his kind of way
of understanding religion.
And I think that's quite beautiful.
And for me,
every all of these things
are related, interrelated,
the technology and what
it means to be human.
And I think it's very important though
that we remember that
as when we're immersed
in the technology and the research.
I think a lot of researchers
that I see in our field are
a little bit too narrow
and only understand the technology.
And I think also that's why it's important
for this to be debated
by society at large.
And I'm very supportive of things like
the AI summits that will happen
and governments understanding it.
And I think that's one good
thing about the chatbot era
and the product era of AI is that
everyday person can
actually feel and interact
with cutting-edge AI
and feel it for themselves.
- Yeah, because they force
the technologist to have
the human conversation.
Yeah, for sure.
- Yeah.
- That's the hopeful aspect of it.
Like you said, it's a dual-use technology
that we're forcefully integrating
the entire of humanity into it by
into the discussion about AI.
Because ultimately AI, AGI will be used
for things that states
use technologies for,
which is conflict and so on.
And the more we integrate
humans into this picture
by having chats with them,
the more we will guide.
- Yeah, be able to adapt,
society will be able to
adapt to these technologies
like we've always done in the past
with the incredible technologies
we've invented in the past.
- Do you think there will be
something like a Manhattan
Project where there will be
an escalation of the
power of this technology,
and states in their old way of thinking
will try to use it as weapons technologies
and there will be this kind of escalation?
- I hope not.
I think that would be
very dangerous to do.
And I think also,
you know, not the right
use of the technology.
I hope we'll end up with
something more collaborative if needed.
Like more like a CERN project.
- Yeah.
- You know, where,
it's research focused
and the best minds in
the world come together
to carefully complete the final steps
and make sure it's responsibly done,
before, you know, like
deploying it to the world.
We'll see.
I mean it's difficult
with the current
geopolitical climate I think
to see cooperation,
but things can change.
And I think at least on
the scientific level,
it's important for the
researchers to keep in touch
and keep close to each other
on at least on those kinds of topics.
- Yeah, and I personally
believe on the education side.
And immigration side,
it would be great if both directions,
people from the West immigrate
to China and China back.
I mean there is some like
family human aspect of
people just intermixing.
- [Demis] Yeah.
- And thereby those ties grow strong,
so you can't sort of
divide against each other
this kind of old school way of thinking.
And so multicultural,
multidisciplinary research teams
working on scientific
questions, that's like the hope.
Don't let the leaders that
are warmongers divide us.
I think science is the ultimately
a really beautiful connector.
- Yeah, science has always been I think
quite a very collaborative endeavor.
And you know, scientists know that
it's a collective endeavor as well.
And we can all learn from each other.
So perhaps it could be a vector
to get a bit of cooperation.
- What's your ridiculous question?
What's your p doom,
probability of the human
civilization destroys itself?
- Well, look, I don't have a,
it's, you know, I don't
have a p doom number.
The reason I don't is because I think
it would imply a level of
precision that is not there.
So like,
I don't know how people are
getting their p doom numbers.
I think it's a kind of a little
bit of a ridiculous notion
because what I would say
is it's definitely non-zero
and it's probably non-negligible.
So that in itself is pretty sobering.
And my view is it's just
hugely uncertain, right?
What these technologies
are gonna be able to do?
How fast are they gonna take off?
How controllable they're gonna be?
Some things may turn out to be,
and hopefully like way easier
than we thought, right?
But it may be there are
some really hard problems
that are harder than we guess today.
And I think we don't know that for sure.
And so under those conditions
of a lot of uncertainty,
but huge stakes both ways.
You know, on the one hand,
we could solve all
diseases, energy problems,
the scarcity problem and
then travel to the stars
and conscious of the stars
and maximum human flourishing,
on the other hand, is this
sort of p doom scenarios.
So given the uncertainty around it
and the importance of it,
it's clear to me the only
rational, sensible approach is
to proceed with cautious optimism.
So we want the outcome,
we want the benefits of course
and all of the amazing
things that AI can bring.
And actually I would be
really worried for humanity
if given the other
challenges that we have,
climate, disease, you know,
aging, resources, all of that,
if I didn't know something
that AI was coming down the line, right?
How would we solve all
those other problems?
I think it's hard.
So I think we've, you know,
it could be amazingly
transformative for good.
But on the other hand, you know,
there are these risks
that we know are there,
but we can't quite quantify.
So the best thing to do is
to use the scientific
method to do more research
to try and more precisely
define those risks
and of course address them.
And I think that's what we're doing.
I think there probably needs to be
10 times more effort of
that than there is now
as we are getting closer
and closer to the AGI line.
- What would be the source
of worry for you more,
would it be human-caused or AI AGI-caused?
- Yeah.
- The humans abusing
that technology versus AGI itself
through mechanism that
you've spoken about,
which is fascinating deception
or this kind of stuff,
- Yes.
- getting better and
better and better secretly,
and then states.
- I think they operate
over different timescales
and they're equally important to address.
So there's just the common
garden-variety of like,
you know, bad actors using new technology,
in this case, general purpose technology,
and repurposing it for harmful ends.
And that's a huge risk.
And I think that has
a lot of complications
because generally, you know,
I mean huge favor of open
science and open source
and in fact we did it with
all our science projects
like AlphaFold and all of those things
for the benefit of the
scientific community.
But how does one restrict bad actors
access to these powerful systems,
whether they're individuals
or even rogue states
but enable access at the
same time to good actors
to maximally build on top of.
It's a pretty tricky problem that
I've not heard a clear solution to.
So there's the bad actor use case problem
and then there's obviously
as the systems become more
agentic and closer to AGI
and more autonomous,
how do we ensure the guardrails
and they stick to what we want them to do
and under our control.
- Yeah, I tend to, maybe
my mind is limited,
worry more about the
humans, so the bad actors.
And there it could be in part
how do you not put destructive technology
in the hands of bad actors,
but in another part,
from, again, geopolitical
technology perspective,
how do you reduce the number
of bad actors in the world?
That's also an interesting human problem.
- Yeah, it's a hard problem.
I mean look, we can maybe
also use the technology itself
to help early warning on
some of the bad actor use cases, right?
Whether that's bio or
nuclear or whatever it is,
like AI could be potentially helpful there
as long as the AI that you're using is
itself reliable, right?
So it's a sort of interlocking problem
and that's what makes it very tricky.
And again, it may require some
agreement internationally,
at least between China and the US
of some basic standards, right?
- I have to ask you about
the book "The Maniac,"
there's this, the hand of God moment,
Lee Sedol's move 78
that perhaps the last time
a human did a move of
sort of pure human genius
and beat AlphaGo or like broke its brain.
- Yes.
- Sorry to anthropomorphize.
But it's an interesting moment
'cause I think in so many
domains it will keep happening.
- Yeah, it's a special moment.
And, you know, it was great for Lee Sedol.
And you know, I think in a way,
they were sort of inspiring each other.
We as a team were inspired
by Lee Sedol's brilliance and nobleness.
And then maybe he got inspired by,
you know, what AlphaGo was doing
to then conjure this incredible
inspirational moment.
It's all, you know, captured very well
in the documentary about it.
- Yes.
- And I think that'll
continue in many domains
where there's this at least for the,
again, for the foreseeable future of like
the humans bringing in the ingenuity
and asking the right question let's say,
and then utilizing these
tools in a way that
then cracks a problem.
- Yeah, as the AI become
smarter and smarter,
one of the interesting questions
we can ask ourselves is
what makes humans special?
It does feel perhaps biased
that we humans are deeply special.
I don't know if it's our intelligence.
It could be something else
that other thing that's outside
the mad dreams of reason.
- I think that's what I've
always imagined when I was a kid
and starting on this journey of like,
I was of course fascinated
by things like consciousness,
did a neuroscience PhD to
look at how the brain works,
especially imagination and memory.
I focused on the hippocampus.
And it's sort of gonna be interesting.
I always thought the best way,
of course one can philosophize about it
and have thought experiments
and maybe even do actual experiments
like you do in neuroscience
on real brains,
but in the end, I always imagined that
building AI a kind of intelligent artifact
and then comparing that to the human mind
and seeing what the differences were
would be the best way to uncover
what's special about the human mind,
if indeed there is anything special.
And I suspect there probably is,
but it's gonna be hard to, you know,
I think this journey we're on
will help us understand
that and define that.
And, you know, there may be a difference
between carbon-based
substrates that we are
and silicon ones when
they process information.
You know, one of the best definitions
I like of consciousness is
it's the way information
feels when we process it,
right?
- Yeah.
- It could be.
I mean, it's not a very
helpful scientific explanation,
but I think it's kind of
interesting intuitive one.
And so, you know, on this journey,
this scientific journey we're on will
I think help uncover that mystery.
- Yeah.
"What I cannot create,
I do not understand,"
that's somebody you deeply admire,
Richard Feynman like you mentioned.
You also reach for the
Wagner's dreams of universality
that he saw in constraint domains,
but also broadly generally
in mathematics and so on.
So many aspects on which
you're pushing towards.
Not to start trouble at
the end, but Roger Penrose.
- Yes, okay.
- So, you know,
do you think consciousness,
does this hard problem of consciousness,
how information feels?
Do you think consciousness,
first of all, is a computation?
And if it is,
if it's information processing
like you said everything is,
is it something that could be modeled
by a classical computer?
- Yeah.
- Or is it a quantum mechanical in nature?
- Well, look, Penrose is amazing thinker,
one of the greatest of the modern era.
And we've had a lot of
discussions about this.
Of course we cordially disagree.
Which is, you know, I feel like,
I mean he collaborated with
a lot of good neuroscientists
to see if he could find mechanisms
for quantum mechanics
behavior in the brain.
And to my knowledge,
they haven't found
anything convincing yet.
So my betting is there is that,
it's mostly, you know,
it is just classical computing
that's going on in the brain,
which suggests that all the phenomena
are modelable or mimicable
by a classical computer.
But we'll see.
You know, there may be this
final mysterious things of
the feeling of consciousness, the qualia,
these kinds of things
that philosophers debate
where it's unique to the substrate.
We may even come towards
understanding that
if we do things like Neuralink
or have neural interfaces
to the AI systems,
which I think we probably will eventually
maybe to keep up with the AI systems,
we might actually be able
to feel for ourselves
what it's like to compute
on silicon, right?
So, and maybe that will tell us.
So I think it's gonna be interesting.
I had a debate once with the
late Daniel Dennett about
why do we think each other are conscious?
Okay, so it's for two reasons.
One is you're exhibiting
the same behavior that I am.
So that's one thing,
behaviorally you seem like
a conscious being if I am.
But the second thing which
is often overlooked is that
we're running on the same substrate.
So if you're behaving in the same way
and we're running on the same substrate,
it's most parsimonious to assume
you are feeling the same
experience that I'm feeling.
But with an AI that's on silicon,
we won't be able to
rely on the second part.
Even if it exhibits the first part,
that behavior looks like a
behavior of a conscious being.
It might even claim it is.
But we wouldn't know how it actually felt.
And it probably couldn't
know what we felt,
at least in the first stages.
Maybe when we get to super intelligence
and the technologies that builds,
perhaps we'll be able to bridge that.
- No, I mean that's a huge
test for radical empathy is
to empathize with a different substrate.
- Right, exactly.
We've never had to confront that before.
- Yeah, so maybe,
- Yeah.
- through brain computer interfaces
we'll be able to truly empathize
what it feels like to be a computer,
to compute.
- Well, for information to be computed
not on a carbon system.
- I mean that's deeply,
I mean some people kind of
think about that with plants,
with other life forms
which are different.
- Yes, it could be, exactly.
- Similar substrate, but
sufficiently far enough
on the evolutionary tree,
- Yup.
- that it's requires a radical empathy.
But to do that with a computer.
- I mean, no, we sort of,
there are animal studies on this of like,
of course higher animals like,
you know, killer whales and
dolphins and dogs and monkeys,
you know, they have some,
and elephants, you know,
they have some aspects certainly
of consciousness, right?
Even though they're not might not be
that smart on an IQ sense.
So we can already empathize with that.
And maybe even some of
our systems one day,
like we built this thing
called DolphinGemma.
You know, which can,
a version of our system was trained
on dolphin and whale sounds.
And maybe we'll be able to build
an interpreter or
translator at some point.
It should be pretty cool.
- What gives you hope for the
future of human civilization?
- Well, what gives me hope is that
I think our almost limitless
ingenuity, first of all,
I think the best of us
and the best human minds are incredible.
And you know, I love, you know,
meeting and watching any human
that's the top of their game,
whether that's sport or science or art,
you know, it's just nothing
more wonderful than that,
seeing them in their element and flow.
I think it's almost limitless.
You know, our brains are general systems,
intelligent systems.
So I think it's almost limitless
what we can potentially do with them.
And then the other thing is
our extreme adaptability.
I think it's gonna be okay in terms of
there's gonna be a lot of change,
but look where we are now
without effectively our
hunter-gatherer brains.
How is it we can, you know,
we can cope with the modern world, right?
Flying on planes,
doing podcasts.
- Yeah.
- You know, playing computer games
and virtual simulations.
- Yeah.
- I mean it's already mind-blowing
given that our mind was developed for,
you know, hunting buffaloes on the tundra.
And so I think this is just the next step.
And it's actually kind
of interesting to see
how society's already adapted to this
mind-blowing AI technology
- Yeah.
- we have today already.
- Yeah.
- It's sort of like,
oh, I talked to chatbots, totally fine.
- And it's very possible that
this very podcast activity,
which I'm here for, will be
completely replaced by AI.
I'm very replaceable
and I'm waiting for it.
- Not to the level
that you can do it, Lex, I don't think.
- Ah, thank you.
That's what we humans do to each other,
we compliment.
- Yes, exactly.
- All right.
And I'm deeply grateful
for us humans to have
this infinite capacity for curiosity,
adaptability like you said,
and also compassion
and ability to love.
- Exactly.
- All of those human things.
- All the things
that are deeply human.
- Well, this is a huge honor, Demis.
You're one of the truly
special humans in the world.
Thank you so much for doing what you do
and for talking today.
- Well, thank you very much, Lex.
- Thanks for listening
to this conversation
with Demis Hassabis.
To support this podcast,
please check out our
sponsors in the description
and consider subscribing to this channel.
And now let me answer some questions
and try to articulate some
things I've been thinking about.
If you would like to submit questions,
including in audio and video form,
go to lexfridman.com/ama.
I got a lot of amazing
questions, thoughts,
and requests from folks.
I'll keep trying to pick some randomly
and comment on it at the
end of every episode.
I got a note on May 21st
this year that said,
hi, Lex, 20 years ago today,
David Foster Wallace delivered
his famous This is Water
speech at Kenyon College.
What do you think of this speech?
Well, first, I think this is
probably one of the greatest
and most unique commencement
speeches ever given.
But of course I have many favorites,
including the one by Steve Jobs.
And David Foster Wallace is
one of my favorite writers
and one of my favorite humans.
There's a tragic honesty to his work
and it always felt as if he was engaging
in a constant battle with his own mind.
And the writing, his writing,
were kind of his notes from
the front lines of that battle.
Now onto the speech,
let me quote some parts.
There's of course the parable of the fish
and the water that goes.
"There are these two
young fish swimming along
and they happen to meet an older fish
swimming the other way,
who nods at them and says,
'Morning, boys.
Hows the water?'
And the two young fish swim on for a bit,
and then eventually,
one of them looks over
at the other and goes,
'What the hell is water?'"
In the speech, David Foster
Wallace goes on to say,
"The point of the fish story is merely
that the most obvious,
important realities are
often the ones that are
hardest to see and talk about.
Stated as an English sentence of course,
this is just the banal platitude,
but the fact is that in the day to day
trenches of adult existence,
banal platitudes can have
a life or death importance,
or so I wish to suggest to you
in this dry and lovely morning."
I have several takeaways
from this parable and
the speech that follows.
First, I think we must
question everything,
and in particular,
the most basic assumptions
about our reality, our life,
and the very nature of existence.
And that this project is
a deeply personal one.
In some fundamental sense,
nobody can really help you
in this process of discovery.
The call to action here I
think from David Foster Wallace
as he puts it is to, quote,
"To be just a little less arrogant.
To have just a little
more critical awareness
about myself and my certainties.
Because a huge percentage of the stuff
that I tend to be
automatically certain of is,
it turns out, totally wrong and deluded."
All right, back to me, Lex speaking.
Second takeaway is that
the central spiritual battles
of our life are not fought
on a mountaintop somewhere
at a meditation retreat,
but it is fought in the
mundane moments of daily life.
Third takeaway is that
we too easily give away
our time and attention
to the multitude of distractions
that the world feeds us,
the insatiable black holes of attention.
David Foster Wallace's call
to action in this case is
to be deeply aware of
the beauty in each moment
and to find meaning in the mundane.
I often quote David Foster
Wallace in his advice
that the key to life is to be unborable.
And I think this is exactly right.
Every moment, every
object, every experience
when looked at closely
enough contains within it
infinite richness to explore.
And since Demis Hassabis of
this very podcast episode and I
are such fans of Richard Feynman,
allow me to also quote Mr.
Feynman on this topic as well.
Quote,
"I have a friend who's an artist
and has sometimes taken a view,
which I don't agree with very well.
He'll hold up a flower and say,
'Look how beautiful it is,'
and I'll agree.
Then he says,
'I, as an artist can see
how beautiful this is,
but you as a scientist take this all apart
and it becomes a dull thing.'
And I think that's kind of nutty.
First of all, the beauty
that he sees is available
to other people and to me too, I believe.
Although I may not be quite
as refined aesthetically as he is,
I can appreciate the beauty of a flower.
At the same time,
I see much more about
the flower than he sees.
I could imagine the cells in there,
the complicated actions
inside which also have beauty.
I mean, it's not just
beauty at this dimension
at one centimeter,
there's also beauty at
the smaller dimensions,
their inner structure, also the processes.
The fact that the colors
and the flower evolved
in order to attract the insects
to pollinate it is interesting,
it means that the insects
can see the color.
It adds a question,
does this aesthetic sense
also exist in lower forms?
Why is it aesthetic?
All kinds of interesting questions,
which the science knowledge
only adds to the excitement,
the mystery, and the awe of a flower.
It only adds."
All right, back to David
Foster Wallace's speech.
He has a great story in there
that I particularly enjoy.
It goes,
there are these two guys
sitting together in a bar
in the remote Alaskan wilderness.
One of the guys is religious,
the other is an atheist.
And the two are arguing
about the existence of God
with that special intensity that comes
after about the fourth beer.
And the atheist says,
look, it's not like I
don't have actual reasons
for not believing in God.
It's not like I haven't ever experimented
with the whole God and prayer thing.
Just last month,
I got caught away from the
camp in that terrible blizzard
and I was totally lost
and I couldn't see a thing
and it was 50 below, and so I tried it.
I fell on my knees in
the snow and cried out,
oh God, if there is a God,
I'm lost in this blizzard
and I'm gonna die if you don't help me.
And now back in the bar,
the religious guy looks at
the atheist all puzzled.
Well, then you must believe now, he says.
After all, there you are alive.
The atheist just rolls his eyes, no man.
All that happened was
a couple of Eskimos
happened to be wandering by
and show me the way back to the camp.
All this I think teaches us that
everything is a matter of perspective
and that wisdom may arrive
if we have the humility
to keep shifting and expanding
our perspective on the world.
Thank you for allowing me to talk a bit
about David Foster Wallace.
He's one of my favorite writers
and he's a beautiful soul.
If I may,
one more thing I wanted
to briefly comment on.
I found myself to be in
this strange position of
getting attacked online
often from all sides,
including being lied about
sometimes through selective
misrepresentation,
but often through downright lies.
I don't know how else to put it.
This all breaks my heart frankly.
But I've come to understand that
it's the way of the internet
and the cost of the path I've chosen.
There's been days when it's
been rough on me mentally.
It's not fun being lied about,
especially when it's about
things that are usually
for a long time have been
a source of happiness and joy for me.
But again, that's life.
I'll continue exploring the
world of people and ideas
with empathy and rigor,
wearing my heart on my
sleeve as much as I can.
For me, that's the only way to live.
Anyway, a common attack on me is
about my time at MIT and Drexel,
two great universities I love
and have tremendous respect for.
Since a bunch of lies
have accumulated online
about me on these topics
to a sad and at times hilarious degree,
I thought I would once more
state the obvious facts
about my bio for the small
number of you who may care.
TL;DR, two things.
First, as I say often,
including in a recent podcast episode that
somehow was listened to by
many millions of people,
I proudly went to Drexel University
for my bachelor's, master's,
and doctor degrees.
Second, I am a research scientist at MIT
and have been there in
a paid research position
for the last 10 years.
Allow me to elaborate a bit
more on these two things now,
but please skip if this
is not at all interesting.
So like I said,
a common attack on me is that
I have no real affiliation with MIT.
The accusation I guess is that
I'm falsely claiming an MIT affiliation
because I taught a lecture there once.
Nope, that accusation
against me is a complete lie.
I have been at MIT for over 10 years
in a paid research position
from 2015 to today.
To be extra clear,
I'm a research scientist
at MIT working in LIDS,
the Laboratory for Information
and Decision Systems
in the College of Computing.
For now, since I'm still at MIT,
you can see me in the directory
and on the various lab pages.
I have indeed given many
lectures at MIT over the years,
a small fraction of which I posted online.
Teaching for me always
has been just for fun
and not part of my research work.
I personally think I suck at it,
but I have always learned and
grown from the experience.
It's like Feynman spoke about,
if you want to understand
something deeply,
it's good to try to teach it.
But like I said, my main focus
has always been on research.
I published many peer-reviewed papers
that you can see in my
Google Scholar profile.
For my first four years at MIT,
I worked extremely intensively.
Most weeks were 80 to 100 hour work weeks.
After that, in 2019,
I still kept my research
scientists position,
but I split my time taking a leap
to pursue projects in AI
and robotics outside MIT
and to dedicate a lot
of focus to the podcast.
As I've said,
I've been continuously surprised
just how many hours preparing
for an episode takes.
There are many episodes of the podcast
for which I have to read, write, and think
for 100, 200 or more hours
across multiple weeks and months.
Since 2020, I have not actively
published research papers.
Just like the podcast,
I think it's something that's
a serious full-time effort.
But not publishing and
doing full-time research
has been eating at me
because I love research,
and I love programming
and building systems
that test out interesting technical ideas,
especially in the context of human AI
or human-robot interaction.
I hope to change this in
the coming months and years.
What I've come to realize about myself is
if I don't publish
or if I don't launch
systems that people use,
I definitely feel like a
piece of me is missing.
It legitimately is a
source of happiness for me.
Anyway, I'm proud of my time at MIT.
I was and am constantly surrounded
by people much smarter than me,
many of whom have become
lifelong colleagues and friends.
MIT is a place I go to escape the world,
to focus on exploring
fascinating questions
at the cutting-edge of
science and engineering.
This again, makes me truly happy.
And it does hit pretty hard
on a psychological level
when I'm getting attacked over this.
Perhaps I'm doing something wrong.
If I am, I will try to do better.
In all this discussion of academic work,
I hope you know that I
don't ever mean to say
that I'm an expert at anything.
In the podcast and in my private life,
I don't claim to be smart.
In fact, I often call
myself an idiot and mean it.
I try to make fun of
myself as much as possible,
and in general, to
celebrate others instead.
Now to talk about Drexel University,
which I also love,
and proud of and am deeply
grateful for my time there.
As I said, I went to Drexel
for my bachelor's, master's,
and doctorate degrees
in Computer Science and
Electrical Engineering.
I've talked about Drexel many times,
including as I mentioned at
the end of a recent podcast,
the Donald Trump episode.
Funny enough that was listened
to by many millions of people
where I answered a question
about graduate school
and explained my own journey at Drexel
and how grateful I am for it.
If it's at all interesting to you,
please go listen to
the end of that episode
or watch the related clip.
At Drexel, I met and worked with
many brilliant researchers and mentors
from whom I've learned a lot
about engineering, science, and life.
There are many valuable things I gained
from my time at Drexel.
First, I took a large number
of very difficult math
and theoretical computer science courses.
They taught me how to think
deeply and rigorously.
And also how to work hard and not give up
even if it feels like I'm
too dumb to find a solution
to a technical problem.
Second, I programmed a
lot during that time,
mostly C, C++.
I programmed robots,
optimization algorithms,
computer vision systems,
wireless network protocols,
multimodal machine learning systems,
and all kinds of simulations
of physical systems.
This is where I really develop
a love for programming,
including, yes, Emacs
and the Kinesis keyboard.
I also, during that time, read a lot.
I played a lot of guitar,
wrote a lot of crappy poetry,
and trained a lot in judo and jiujitsu,
which I cannot sing enough praises to.
Jiujitsu humbled me on a
daily basis throughout my 20s,
and it still does to this very day
whenever I get a chance to train.
Anyway, I hope that the folks
who occasionally get swept up
and the chanting online crowds
that want to tear down others
don't lose themselves in it too much.
In the end,
I still think there's more
good than bad in people,
but we're all, each of us, a mixed bag.
I know I am very much flawed.
I speak awkwardly.
I sometimes say stupid shit.
I can get irrationally emotional.
I can be too much of a
dick when I should be kind.
I can lose myself in a biased rabbit hole
before I wake up
to the bigger, more
accurate picture of reality.
I'm human and so are you,
for better or for worse.
And I do still believe
we're in this whole
beautiful mess together.
I love you all.

- I think it's possible
that physics has exploits
and we should be trying to find them.
Arranging some kind of a crazy
quantum mechanical system
that somehow gives you buffer overflow,
somehow gives you a rounding
error in the floating point.
Synthetic intelligence is kind of like
the next stage of development.
And I dunno where it
leads to, at some point
I suspect the universe
is some kind of a puzzle.
These synthetic AIs will uncover
that puzzle and solve it.
- The following is a conversation
with Andrej Karpathy,
previously the director of AI at Tesla.
And before that, at OpenAi and Stanford.
He is one of the greatest
scientists, engineers,
and educators in the history
of artificial intelligence.
This is the Lex Fridman Podcast.
To support it, please
check out our sponsors.
And now, dear friends,
here's Andrej Karpathy.
What is a neural network
and why does it seem to do
such a surprisingly good job of learning?
- What is a neural network?
It's a mathematical
abstraction of the brain.
I would say that's how it
was originally developed.
At the end of the day, it's
a mathematical expression
and it's a fairly simple
mathematical expression
when you get down to it.
It's basically a sequence
of meter multipliers,
whichever really dot
products mathematically
and some nonlinearity is thrown in.
And so it's a very simple
mathematical expression
and it's got knobs in it.
- Many knobs.
- Many knobs.
And these knobs are loosely
related to basically
the synapses in your brain.
They're trainable.
They're modifiable.
And so the idea is we
need to find the setting
of the knobs that makes the neural net
do whatever you want it to do,
like classify images and so on.
And so there's not too much
mystery I would say in it.
You might think that, basically,
you don't want to endow it
with too much meaning
with respect to the brain
and how it works.
It's really just a complicated
mathematical expression
with knobs.
And those knobs need a proper setting
for it to do something desirable.
- Yeah.
But poetry is just the collection
of letters with spaces,
but it can make us feel a certain way.
And in that same way,
when you get a large
number of knobs together,
whether it's inside the
brain or inside a computer,
they seem to surprise us with their power.
- Yeah.
I think that's fair.
So basically, I think I'm
underselling it by a lot
because you definitely do get
very surprising emergent
behaviors out of these neural nets
when they're large enough
and trained on complicated
enough problems.
Like say, for example,
the next-word prediction
in a massive dataset from the internet.
And then these neural nets take on
pretty surprising magical properties.
Yeah, I think it's kind of
interesting how much you can get
out of even very simple
mathematical formalism.
- When your brain right now is talking,
is it doing next-word prediction
or is it doing something more interesting?
- Well, it's definitely some
kind of a generative model
that's GPT like and prompted by you.
- [Lex] Yes.
- So you're giving me a prompt
and I'm kind of like responding
to it in a generative way.
- And by yourself perhaps a little bit,
like are you adding extra
prompts from your own memory
inside your head or no?
- Well, it definitely feels
like you're referencing
some kind of a declarative structure
of memory and so on.
And then you're putting that
together with your prompt
and giving away some answers.
- How much of what you just said
has been said by you before.
- Nothing, basically right?
- No, but if you actually
look at all the words
you've ever said in your
life and you do a search,
you'll probably have said
a lot of the same words
in the same order before.
- Yeah.
Could be.
I mean, I'm using phrases
that are common, et cetera,
but I'm remixing it into
a pretty unique sentence
at the end of the day.
But you're right, definitely,
there's like a ton of remixing.
- It's like Magnus Carlson
said I'm rated 2,900, whatever,
which is pretty decent.
I think you're talking very,
you're not giving enough credit
to neural nets here.
What's your best intuition
about this emergent behavior?
- I mean, it's kind of interesting
because I'm simultaneously
underselling them,
but I also feel like there's
an element to which I'm over-
it's actually kind of incredible
that you can get so much
emergent magical behavior
out of them despite them being
so simple mathematically.
So I think those are two
surprising statements
that are juxtaposed together.
And I think, basically, what it is,
is we are actually fairly good
at optimizing these neural nets.
And when you give them
a hard enough problem,
they are forced to learn
very interesting solutions
in the optimization.
And those solutions basically
have these emergent properties
that are very interesting.
- There's wisdom and
knowledge in the knobs.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- And so this representation
that's in the knobs
does it make sense to you intuitively,
that a large number of knobs
can hold a representation
that captures some deep wisdom
about the data it has looked at.
It's a lot of knobs.
- It's a lot of knobs.
And somehow, so speaking
concretely, one of the neural nets
that people are very excited
about right now are GPTs,
which are basically just
next-word prediction networks.
So you consume a sequence
of words from the internet
and you try to predict the next word.
And once you train these
on a large enough data set,
you can basically prompt these neural nets
in arbitrary ways and you can
ask them to solve problems.
And they will.
So you can just tell them,
you can make it look like
you're trying to solve some
kind of a mathematical problem.
And they will continue what
they think is the solution
based on what they've
seen on the internet.
And very often those solutions
look very remarkably consistent.
Look correct, potentially even.
- Do you still think about
the brain side of it?
So as neural nets as an abstraction,
a mathematical abstraction of the brain,
do you still draw wisdom
from the biological neural networks
or even the bigger question.
So you're a big fan of biology
and biological computation.
What impressive thing
is biology doing to you
that computers are not yet, that gap?
- I would say I'm definitely on,
I'm much more hesitant with
the analogies to the brain
than I think you would see
potentially in the field.
And I feel like certainly, the
way neural networks started
is everything stemmed from
inspiration by the brain.
But at the end of the day,
the artifacts that you get
after training, they are arrived at
by a very different optimization process
than the optimization process
that gave rise to the brain.
And so I think of it as a very
complicated alien artifact.
It's something different.
- [Lex] The brain?
- Oh no, sorry.
The neural nest that we're training.
- [Lex] Okay.
- They are a complicated alien artifact.
I do not make analogies to the brain
because I think the optimization process
that gave rise to it is very
different from the brain.
So there was no multi-agent,
self-play setup and evolution.
It was an optimization that is basically
what amounts to a compression objective
on a mass amount of data.
- Okay.
So artificial neural networks
are doing compression
and biological neural networks-
- [Andrej] Are trying to survive.
- Are not really doing
anything, they're an agent
in a multi-agent, self-play system
that's been running for
a very, very long time.
- Yes.
That said, evolution has
found that it is very useful
to predict and have a
predictive model in the brain.
And so, I think our
brain utilizes something
that looks like that as a part of it,
but it has a lot more catches and gizmos
and value functions and ancient nuclei
that are all trying to
like make it survive
and reproduce and everything else.
- And the whole thing through
embryogenesis is built
from a single-cell.
I mean, it's just the
code is inside the DNA
and it just builds it up
like the entire organism
with arms-
- [Andrej] It's definitely crazy.
- And the head and legs.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- And it does it pretty well.
- [Andrej] It should not be possible.
- So there's some learning going on.
There's some kind of computation
going through that building process.
I mean, I don't know where,
if you were just to look
at the entirety of
history of life on earth,
where do you think is the
most interesting invention?
Is it the origin of life itself?
Is it just jumping to Eukaryotes?
Is it mammals?
Is it humans themselves, Homo sapiens?
The origin of intelligence or
highly complex intelligence?
Or is it all just a continuation
of the same kind of process?
- Certainly, I would say it's
an extremely remarkable story
that I'm only briefly
learning about recently
all the way from, actually,
you almost have to start
at the formation of earth
and all of its conditions
and the entire solar system
and how everything is arranged
with Jupiter and moon and the
habitable zone and everything.
And then you have an active earth
that's turning over material
and then you start with a
biogenesis and everything.
And so it's all a pretty remarkable story.
I'm not sure that I can pick
a single unique piece of it
that I find most interesting.
I guess for me, as an artificial
intelligence researcher,
it's probably the last piece.
We have lots of animals
that are not building
technological society but we do.
And it seems to have
happened very quickly.
It seems to have happened very recently.
And something very
interesting happened there
that I don't fully understand.
I almost understand everything
else I think intuitively,
but I don't understand exactly that part
and how quick it was.
- Both explanations would be interesting.
One is that this is just a continuation
of the same kind of process.
There's nothing special about humans.
Deeply understanding that
would be very interesting
that we think of ourselves as special.
But it was obvious, it was
already written in the code
that you would have greater
and greater intelligence emerging.
And then the other explanation,
which is something truly special happened,
something like a rare event,
whether it's like crazy rare
event like a "Space Odyssey",
what would it be?
See if you say like the invention of fire
or as Richard Rankin says,
the beta males deciding
a clever way to kill the
alpha males by collaborating.
So just optimizing the
collaboration, the multi-agent,
aspect of the multi-agent and
that really being constrained
on resources and trying to
survive the collaboration aspect
is what created the complex intelligence.
But it seems like it's a natural algorithm
to the evolution process.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- What could possibly be a
magical thing that happened,
like a rare thing that would
say that humans are actually,
human-level intelligence is
actually a really rare thing
in the universe?
- Yeah, I'm hesitant to say
that it is rare by the way,
but it definitely seems like
it's like a punctuated
equilibrium where you have
lots of exploration and
then you have certain leaps,
sparse leaps in between.
So of course, like origin
of life would be one,
DNA, sex, Eukaryotic life,
the endosymbiosis event
where the archon ate little
bacteria, just the whole thing.
And then of course, emergence
of consciousness and so on.
So it seems like definitely
there are sparse events
where massive amount of progress was made.
But yeah, it's kind of hard to pick one.
- So you don't think humans are unique?
To that I ask you how many
intelligent alien civilizations
do you think are out there
and is their intelligence
different or similar to ours?
- Yeah, I've been preoccupied
with this question
quite a bit recently.
Basically, the Fermi paradox
and just thinking through.
And the reason actually
that I am very interested
in the origin of life is
fundamentally trying to understand
how common it is that there
are technological societies
out there in space.
And the more I study it,
the more I think that
there should be quite a few, quite a lot.
- Why haven't we heard from them?
'Cause I agree with you.
It feels like, I just don't see why
what we did here on earth
is so difficult to do.
- Yeah.
And especially when you
get into the details of it.
I used to think origin of life was very,
it was this magical rare event.
But then you read books
like for example Nick Lane,
"The Vital Question", "Life
Ascending", et cetera.
And he really gets in and
he really makes you believe
that this is not that rare.
- Basic chemistry.
- You have an active earth and
you have your alkaline vents
and you have lots of
alkaline waters mixing
where there is a devotion and
you have your proton gradients
and you have these little porous pockets
of these alkaline vents
that concentrate chemistry.
And basically, as he steps through
all of these little pieces,
you start to understand
that actually this is not that crazy.
You could see this happen on other systems
and he really takes
you from just a geology
to primitive life.
And he makes it feel like this
is actually pretty plausible.
And also like the origin of
life was actually fairly fast
after formation of earth,
if I remember correctly,
just a few hundred million
years or something like that
after basically when it was
possible, life actually arose.
And so that makes me feel like
that is not the constraint,
that is not the limiting variable
and that life should
actually be fairly common.
And then where the drop-offs are
is very interesting to think about.
I currently think that there's
no major drop-offs basically.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And so there should
be quite a lot of life.
And basically, where
that brings me to then
is the only way to reconcile the fact
that we haven't found anyone and so on
is that we can't see them,
we can't observe them.
- Just a quick brief comment,
Nick Lane and a lot of
biologists I talk to,
they really seem to think
that the jump from bacteria
to more complex organisms
is the hardest jump.
- [Andrej] The Eukaryotic life, basically.
- Yeah.
I get it.
They're much more knowledgeable than me
about the intricacies of biology.
But that seems crazy
'cause how many single-cell
organisms are there?
And how much time you have
surely it's not that difficult.
And a billion years is not even that long
of a time really, just all these bacteria
under constrained
resources battling it out.
I'm sure they can invent more complex.
I don't understand.
It's like how to move from
a "Hello, World!" program
to invent a function
or something like that.
I don't-
- Yeah.
- Yeah, so I'm with you.
I just feel like I don't see
any, if the origin of life,
that would be my intuition,
that's the hardest thing.
But if that's not the hardest thing
'cause it happened so quickly,
then it's gotta be everywhere and yeah,
maybe we're just too dumb to see it.
- Well, it's just we don't
have really good mechanisms
for seeing this life.
So I'm not an expert just to preface this
but just from what-
- On aliens?
I wanna meet an expert
on alien intelligence
and how to communicate.
- I'm very suspicious of our ability
to find these intelligences out there
and to find these earths like radio waves,
for example, are terrible.
Their power drops off as
basically 1 over R-squared.
So I remember reading that
our current radio waves
would not be, the ones
that we are broadcasting,
would not be measurable by
our devices today only like,
was it like one 10th of a light year away?
Not even, basically, tiny distance
because you really need
like a targeted transmission
of massive power directed somewhere
for this to be picked
up on long distances.
And so I just think that our ability
to measure is not amazing.
I think there's probably
other civilizations out there.
And then the big question is
why don't they build one man probes
and why don't they interstellar travel
across the entire galaxy?
And my current answer is,
it's probably interstellar
travel is really hard.
You have the interstellar
medium if you wanna move
at close to speed of light,
you're going to be encountering
bullets along the way
because even like tiny hydrogen atoms
and little particles of dust
have massive kinetic energy
at those speeds.
And so, basically, you need
some kind of shielding,
you have all the cosmic radiation,
it's just brutal out there.
It's really hard.
And so my thinking is
maybe interstellar travel
is just extremely hard.
You have to learn slow.
- Like billions of years to build hard?
It feels like we're not
a billion years away
from doing that.
- It just might be that it's very,
you have to go very slowly potentially,
as an example, through space.
- Right.
As opposed to close to the speed of light.
- Yeah.
So I'm suspicious basically
of our ability to measure life
and I'm suspicious of the
ability to just permeate
all of space in the
galaxy or across galaxies.
And that's the only way
that I can currently see away around it.
- Yeah, it's kind of mind-blowing
to think that there's
trillions of intelligent
alien civilizations out there
slowly traveling through space.
- [Andrej] Maybe.
- To meet each other.
And some of them meet,
some of them go to war,
some of them collaborate.
- Or they're all just independent.
They're all just like little pockets.
I don't know.
- Well, statistically if
there's trillions of them,
surely some of them,
some of the pockets are
close enough together.
- Some of them happen to be close.
Yeah.
- And close enough to see each other.
See, once you see something
that is definitely complex
life, if we see something.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- We're probably going to be
intensely aggressively motivated
to figure out what the hell
that is and try to meet them.
But what would be your
first instinct, to try to,
at a generational-level, meet
them or defend against them?
Or what would be your
instinct as a president
of the United States and a scientist?
I don't know which hat you
prefer in this question.
- Yeah, I think the
question, it's really hard.
I will say like for example, for us,
we have lots of primitive life
forms on earth next to us.
We have all kinds of
ants and everything else
and we share a space with
them and we are hesitant
to impact on them and we're
trying to protect them
by default, because they are amazing,
interesting dynamical systems
that took a long time to evolve.
And they are interesting and special
and I don't know that you
wanna destroy that by default.
And so I like complex dynamical systems
that took a lot of time to evolve.
I think I'd like to preserve
it if I can afford to.
And I'd like to think that
the same would be true
about the galactic resources
and that they would think
that we're kind of
incredible interesting story
that took time, it took a
few billing years to unravel
and you don't want to just destroy it.
- I could see two aliens
talking about earth right now
and saying I'm a big fan of
complex dynamical systems.
So I think it was a
value to preserve these
and who basically are
a video game they watch
or show, a TV show that they watch.
- Yeah.
I think you would need
like a very good reason
I think to destroy it.
Why don't we destroy
these end farms and so on?
It's because we're not actually
really in direct competition
with them right now.
We do it accidentally and so on,
but there's plenty of resources.
And so why would you destroy something
that is so interesting and precious?
- Well, from a scientific
perspective you might probe it.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- You might interact with it lightly.
- Exactly.
You might wanna learn something from it.
Right.
- So I wonder, there could
be certain physical phenomena
that we think is a physical phenomena,
but it's actually interacting with us
to poke the finger and see what happens.
- Yeah.
I think it should be very
interesting to scientists,
other alien scientists, what happened here
and what we're seeing today is a snapshot,
basically, it's a result of
a huge amount of computation
of over billion years
or something like that.
- It could have been initiated by aliens.
This could be a computer
running a program.
Okay.
If you had the power to
do this wouldn't you-
Okay, for sure.
At least I would, I would
pick an earth-like planet
that has the conditions,
base my understanding
of the chemistry prerequisites for life.
And I would seed it with
life and run it, right?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Wouldn't you 100% do that and observe it
and then protect?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- I mean that's not just
a hell of a good TV show.
It's a good scientific experiment.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And it's physical simulation.
Right.
Maybe, evolution is the
most, actually running it,
is the most efficient way
to understand computation
or to compute stuff.
- Or to understand life
or what life looks like
and what branches it can take.
- It does make me kind of feel weird
that we're part of a science experiment,
but maybe everything's
a science experiment,
does that change anything for us,
if we're a science experiment?
- [Andrej] I don't know.
- Two descendants of apes talking about
being inside of a science experiment.
- I'm suspicious of this idea
of a deliberate panspermia
as you described it, sort of.
- Yes.
- I don't see a divine
intervention in some way
in the historical record right now.
I do feel like the story in these books,
like Nick Lane's books and so on,
sort of makes sense and it
makes sense how life arose
on earth uniquely.
And yeah, I don't need to reach
for more exotic explanations right now.
- Sure.
But NPCs inside a video game,
don't observe any divine
intervention either.
We might just be all NPCs
running a kind of code.
- Maybe eventually they will,
currently, NPCs are really dumb.
But once they're running
GPTs, maybe they will be like,
"Hey, this is really suspicious.
What the hell?"
- So you famously Tweeted,
"It looks like if you
bombard earth with photons
for a while, you can emit a Roadster."
So if like in "Hitchhiker's
Guide to the Galaxy",
we would summarize the story of earth.
So in that book it's mostly harmless.
What do you think is all
the possible stories,
a paragraph long or sentence long
that earth could be summarized as,
once it's done it's computation?
So all the possible full,
if earth is a book, right?
- Yeah.
- Probably there has to be an ending.
I mean there's going to be an end to earth
and it could end in all kinds of ways.
It can end soon.
It can end later.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- What do you think are
the possible stories?
- Well definitely, there seems
to be, yeah, you're sort of,
it's pretty incredible that
these self-replicating systems
will basically arise from the dynamics
and then they perpetuate
themselves and become more complex
and eventually, become
conscious and build a society.
And I feel like in some sense
it's a deterministic wave
that just happens on any sufficiently
well-arranged system like earth.
And so I feel like there's a certain sense
of inevitability in it
and it's really beautiful.
- And it ends somehow, right?
So it's a chemically diverse environment
where complex dynamical systems can evolve
and become more, further,
and further complex.
But then there's a certain, what is it?
There's certain terminating conditions.
- Yeah.
I dunno what the
terminating conditions are,
but definitely, there's
a trend line of something
and we're part of that story.
And where does that, where does it go?
So, we're famously described often
as a biological boot loader for AIs
and that's because humans,
I mean, we're an incredible
biological system
and we're capable of
computation and love and so on,
but we're extremely inefficient as well.
We're talking to each other through audio.
It's just embarrassing honestly
that we're manipulating like
seven symbols, serially,
we're using vocal chords.
It's all happening over multiple seconds.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- It's just embarrassing
when you step down
to the frequencies at
which computers operate
or are able to cooperate on.
And so basically, it does seem
like synthetic intelligences
are the next stage of development.
And I dunno where it leads
to, at some point I suspect
the universe is some kind of a puzzle
and these synthetic AIs
will uncover that puzzle
and solve it.
- And then what happens after, right?
'Cause if you just like
fast forward earth,
many billions of years, it's
quiet and then it's turmoil,
you see city lights and stuff like that.
And then what happens at the end?
Is it a, or is it a
calming, is it explosion?
Is it like earth open like a giant.
'Cause you said emit Roadsters.
Will it start emitting a
giant number of satellites?
- Yeah.
Some kind of a crazy explosion.
And we're living, we're
stepping through a explosion
and we're living day-to-day
and it doesn't look like it.
But it's actually, I saw a
very cool animation of earth
and life on earth and,
basically, nothing happens
for a long time.
And then the last like two seconds,
basically cities and everything and just,
and the lower orbit just gets cluttered
and just the whole thing
happens in the last two seconds
and you're like, "This is exploding.
This is a state of explosion."
- Yeah, yeah.
If you play it a normal speed.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- It'll just look like an explosion.
- It's a firecracker.
We're living in a firecracker.
- Where it's going to start emitting
all kinds of interesting things.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And then, so explosion doesn't-
it might actually look
like a little explosion
with lights and fire and energy emitted,
all that kind of stuff.
But when you look inside the
details of the explosion,
there's actual complexity
happening where there's like,
yeah, human life or some kind of life.
- We hope it's not a
destructive firecracker.
It's kind of like a
constructive firecracker.
- [Lex] All right.
So given that.
- I think-
- [Lex] Hilarious discussion.
- It is really interesting to think about
what the puzzle of the universe is.
Did the creator of the
universe give us a message?
For example in the book
"Contact", Carl Sagan,
there's a message for any
civilization in the digits
in the expansion of Pi
and base 11, eventually,
which is kind of an interesting thought.
Maybe we're supposed to be
giving a message to our creator,
maybe we're supposed to somehow create
some kind of a quantum mechanical system
that alerts them to our
intelligent presence here.
'Cause if you think about
it from their perspective,
it's just say like quantum field theory,
massive cellular automaton-like thing.
And how do you even notice that we exist?
You might not even be able to
pick us up in that simulation.
And so how do you prove that you exist,
that you're intelligent,
and that you're part of the universe?
- So this is like a touring test
for intelligence from earth.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- I mean maybe this is
like trying to complete
the next word in a sentence.
This is a complicated way of that.
earth is basically sending a message back.
- Yeah.
The puzzle is basically alerting
the creator that we exist.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Or maybe the puzzle is
just to just break out
of the system and just stick
it to the creator in some way.
Basically, like if you're
playing a video game,
you can somehow find an exploit
and find a way to execute
on the host machine in arbitrary code.
For example, I believe
someone got a game of Mario
to play pong just by exploiting it
and then basically writing
code and being able to execute
arbitrary code in the game.
And so maybe we should be,
maybe that's the puzzle
is that we should find
a way to exploit it.
So, I think like some
of these synthetic AIs
will eventually find the universe
to be some kind of a puzzle
and then solve it in some way.
And that's kind of like
the end game somehow.
- Do you often think
about it as a simulation?
So as are the universe
being a kind of computation
that might have bugs and exploits?
- Yes.
Yeah, I think so.
- [Lex] Is that what
physics is, essentially?
- I think it's possible
that physics has exploits
and we should be trying to find them.
Arranging some kind of a crazy
quantum mechanical system
that somehow gives you buffer overflow
somehow gives you a rounding
error and the floating point.
- Yeah, that's right.
And more and more sophisticated
exploits, those are jokes,
but that could be actually
very close to reality.
- Yeah.
We'll find some way to
extract infinite energy.
For example, when you train
reinforcement learning agents
in physical simulations and you
ask them to say, run quickly
on the flat ground, they'll end up doing
all kinds of weird things
in part of that optimization, right?
They'll get on their back leg
and they'll slide across the floor.
And it's because the optimization,
the enforcement learning
optimization on that agent
has figured out a way to
extract infinite energy
from the friction forces
and, basically, their poor implementation.
And they found a way to
generate infinite energy
and just slide across the surface.
And it's not what you expected,
it's sort of like a perverse solution.
And so maybe we can find
something like that.
Maybe we can be that little dog
in this physical simulation.
- That cracks or escapes
the intended consequences
of the physics that the
universe came up with.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- We'll figure out some kind
of shortcut to some weirdness.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And then, oh man, but see
the problem with that weirdness
is the first person to
discover the weirdness,
like sliding on the back legs,
that's all we're gonna do.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- It's very quickly become
everybody does that thing.
So the paperclip maximizer
is a ridiculous idea,
but that very well could be
what then we'll just all switch
to that 'cause it's so fun.
- Well, no person will discover
it, I think by the way,
I think it's going to have to be
some kind of a super-intelligent
AGI of a third generation.
We're building the
first-generation AGI, maybe.
- Third generation.
Yeah.
So the boot loader for an AI,
that AI will be a boot
loader for another AI.
- [Andrej] Better Ai.
Yeah.
- And then there's no
way for us to introspect
what that might even.
- I think it's very
likely that these things,
for example, say you have these AGIs,
it's very likely for example,
they will be completely inert.
I like these kinds of
sci-fi books sometimes
where these things are
just completely inert,
they don't interact with anything.
And I find that kind of beautiful
because they've probably
figured out the meta-game
of the universe in some way, potentially.
They're doing something
completely beyond our imagination
and they don't interact with
simple chemical life forms.
Why would you do that?
So I find those kinds of ideas compelling.
- What's their source of fun?
What are they doing?
What's the source of pleasure?
- Well, probably
puzzle-solving in the universe?
- But inert, so can you
define what it means inert?
So they escape the interaction
with physical reality?
- They will appear inert to us, as in
they will behave in some
very strange way to us
because they're beyond,
they're playing the meta-game.
And the meta-game is probably say,
like arranging quantum mechanical systems
in some very weird ways to
extract infinite energy,
solve the digital expansion
of Pi to whatever amount,
they will build their own
little fusion reactors
or something crazy.
They're doing something
beyond comprehension
and not understandable to us
and actually brilliant under the hood.
- What if quantum mechanics
itself is the system
and we're just thinking it's physics
but we're really parasites
on or not parasite.
We're not really hurting physics,
we're just living on this organism
and we're like trying to understand it.
But really it is an
organism and with a deep,
deep intelligence maybe
physics itself is the organism
that's doing the super interesting thing
and we're just like one little thing.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Ant sitting on top of it
trying to get energy from it.
- Yeah.
We're just like these
particles in the wave
that I feel like is mostly deterministic
and takes universe from
some kind of a big bang
to some kind of a
super-intelligent replicator,
some kind of a stable
point in the universe
given these laws of physics.
- You don't think, as Einstein
said, God doesn't play dice?
So you think it's mostly deterministic?
There's no randomness in the thing?
- I think it's deterministic.
Oh, there's tons of,
well, I'm gonna be careful
with randomness.
- [Lex] Pseudo-random?
- Yeah, I don't like random.
I think maybe the laws of
physics are deterministic.
Yeah, I think they're deterministic.
- You just got really
uncomfortable with the question.
Do you have anxiety about
whether the universe
is random or not?
Is it a source?
- [Andrej] There's no randomness, no.
- You said you like "Good Will Hunting".
It's not your fault Andrej.
It's not your fault, man.
So you don't like the randomness?
- Yeah, I think it's unsettling.
I think it's a deterministic system.
I think that things that look random,
like say the collapse of the
wave function, et cetera,
I think they're actually deterministic,
just entanglement and so on
and some kind of a multiverse
theory something, something.
- Okay.
So why does it feel like
we have a free will?
Like if I raise this hand,
I chose to do this now.
That doesn't feel like
a deterministic thing.
It feels like I'm making a choice.
- [Andrej] It feels like it.
- Okay.
So it's all feelings.
It's just feelings.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
So when our RL agent is
making a choice is that,
it's not really making a choice,
the choice was already there.
- Yeah.
You're interpreting the choice
and you're creating a narrative
for having made it.
- Yeah.
And now we're talking about the narrative,
it's very meta.
Looking back, what is the most beautiful
or surprising idea in deep
learning or AI in general
that you've come across?
You've seen this field explode
and grow in interesting ways.
Just what cool ideas, like
what made you sit back and go
hmm, big or small?
- Well, the one that I've
been thinking about recently
the most probably is the
transformer architecture.
So basically, neural networks
have a lot of architectures
that were trendy have come and gone
for different sensory modalities.
Like for vision, audio,
text, you would process them
with different-looking neural nets.
And recently, we've seen this convergence
towards one architecture, the transformer
and you can feed it video,
or you can feed it images,
or speech or text and
it just gobbles it up.
And it's a bit of a
general-purpose computer
that is also trainable
and very efficient to run
in our hardware.
And so this paper came
out in 2016, I wanna say.
- [Lex] "Attention is all you need".
- "Attention is all you need".
- You criticized the
paper title in retrospect
that it wasn't, it didn't
foresee the bigness
of the impact that it was going to have.
- Yeah.
I'm not sure if the authors
were aware of the impact
that that paper would go on to have.
Probably they weren't but
I think they were aware
of some of the motivations
and design decisions
behind the transformer and
they chose not to, I think,
expand on it in that way in the paper.
And so I think they had an
idea that there was more
than just the surface of just like,
oh, we're just doing translation
and here's a better architecture.
You're not just doing translation.
This is like a really cool
differentiable, optimizable,
efficient computer that you've proposed.
And maybe they didn't
have all of that foresight
but I think it's really interesting.
- Isn't it funny, sorry to interrupt,
that that title is
memeable, that they went
for such a profound idea.
I don't think anyone used that
kind of title before, right?
- "Attention is all you need"?
Yeah.
It's like a meme or something, basically.
- Yeah.
Isn't it funny that when, maybe if it was
a more serious title it
wouldn't have the impact.
- Honestly, yeah, there
is an element of me
that honestly agrees with
you and prefers it this way.
- [Lex] Yes.
- If it was too grand
it would over-promise
and then under-deliver potentially.
So you want to just meme
your way to greatness?
- That should be a T-shirt.
So you Tweeted, "The
Transformer is a magnificent
neural network architecture
because it is a general-purpose
differentiable computer.
It is simultaneously
expressive in the forward pass,
optimizable via back-propagation
gradient dissent,
and efficient high
parallelism compute graph."
Can you discuss some of those details,
Expressive, optimizable, efficient?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- From memory or in general,
whatever comes to your heart.
- You want to have a
general-purpose computer
that you can train on arbitrary problems
like say the task of next-work prediction
or detecting if there's a cat in a image
or something like that.
And you want to train this computer
so you want to set its weights.
And I think there's
number of design criteria
that overlap in the
transformer simultaneously
that made it very successful.
And I think the authors
were deliberately trying to
make this really powerful architecture.
And so basically, it's very
powerful in the forward pass
because it's able to express
very general computation
as something that looks
like message passing.
You have nodes and they all store vectors
and these nodes get to
basically look at each other,
each other's vectors and
they get to communicate
and basically, nodes get to broadcast,
"Hey, I'm looking for certain things."
And then other nodes get to broadcast,
"Hey, these are the things I have."
Those are the keys and the values.
- So it's not just attention.
- Yeah, exactly.
Transformer is much more than
just the attention component.
It's got many pieces,
architectural that went into it,
the residual connection,
the way it's arranged,
there's a multilayer perceptron
and they are the way
it's stacked and so on.
But basically, there's
a message-passing scheme
where nodes get to look at each other,
decide what's interesting,
and then update each other.
And so I think when you
get to the details of it,
I think it's a very expressive function
so it can express lots of
different types of algorithms
in a forward pass.
Not only that but the way it's designed
with the residual connections,
layer normalizations,
the Softmax, attention, and everything,
it's also optimizable.
This is a really big deal
because there's lots of computers
that are powerful that you can't optimize
or that are not easy to optimize
using the techniques that we have,
which is back-propagation
and gradient descent,
these are first-order methods,
very simple optimizers really.
And so you also need it to be optimizable.
And then lastly, you want
it to run efficiently
in our hardware.
Our hardware is a massive
throughput machine like GPUs,
they prefer lots of parallelism.
So you don't want to do lots
of sequential operations,
you want to do a lot
of operations serially
and the transformer is designed
with that in mind as well.
And so it's designed for our hardware
and is designed to both be very expressive
in a forward pass, but
also very optimizable
in the backward pass.
- And you said that the
residual connection support,
an ability to learn short
algorithms fast and first
and then gradually extend
them longer during training.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- What's the idea of
learning short algorithms?
- Right.
Think of it as a, so
basically a transformer
is a series of blocks, right?
And these blocks have attention
and a little multilayer perceptron,
and so you go off into a
block and you come back
to this residual pathway
and then you go off
and you come back and then you have
a number of layers arranged sequentially.
And so the way to look at it I think is
because of the residual
pathway in the backward pass,
the gradients sort of flow
along it uninterrupted
because addition distributes
the gradient equally
to all of its branches.
So the gradient from the
supervision at the top
just floats directly to the first layer.
And all these residual
connections are arranged
so that in the beginning,
during initialization,
they contribute nothing
to the residual pathway.
So what it looks like is,
imagine the transformer
is like a Python function, like a def,
and you get to do various lines of code.
Say you have a hundred
layers-deep transformer,
typically they would be
much shorter, say 20.
So you have 20 lines of code
then you can do something in them.
And so think of, during the optimization
basically what it looks
like is first you optimize
the first line of code, and
then the second line of code
can kick in, and the third
line of code can kick in.
And I feel like because
of the residual pathway
and the dynamics of the optimization,
you can sort of learn
a very short algorithm
that gets the approximate answer,
but then the other layers
can sort of kick in
and start to create a contribution.
And at the end of it you're
optimizing over an algorithm
that is 20 lines of code.
Except these lines of
code are very complex
because it's an entire
block of a transformer.
You can do a lot in there.
Well, what's really interesting
is that this transformer
architecture actually
has been remarkably resilient.
Basically, the transformer
that came out in 2016
is the transformer you would use today
except you reshuffle
some of the layer norms.
The layer normalizations
have been reshuffled
to a prenorm formulation and
so it's been remarkably stable
but there's a lot of bells and whistles
that people have attached
on it and try to improve it.
I do think that basically, it's a big step
in simultaneously optimizing
for lots of properties
of a desirable neural
network architecture.
And I think people have
been trying to change it
but it's proven remarkably resilient.
But I do think that there should be
even better architectures potentially.
- But you admire the resilience here?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- There's something profound
about this architecture
that leads to resilience.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- So maybe everything can
be turned into a problem
that transformers can solve.
- Currently, definitely
looks like the transformers
taking over AI and you can feed basically
arbitrary problems into
it and it's a general
differentiable computer and
it's extremely powerful.
And this conversions in AI
has been really interesting
to watch for me personally.
- What else do you think
could be discovered here
about transformers?
Like what surprising
thing or is it a stable,
out in a stable place?
Is there something interesting
we might discover about transformers?
Like aha moments, maybe
has to do with memory,
maybe knowledge representation,
that kind of stuff.
- Definitely, the zeitgeist
today is just pushing,
basically, right now the zeitgeist
is do not touch the transformer.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Touch everything else.
- [Lex] Yes.
- So people are scaling up the data sets,
making them much, much bigger.
They're working on the evaluation,
making the evaluation much, much bigger.
And they're basically keeping
the architecture unchanged.
And that's how we've,
that's the last five years
of progress in AI.
- What do you think
about one flavor of it,
which is language models?
Have you been surprised,
has your imagination
been captivated by, you
mentioned GPT and all the bigger,
and bigger, and bigger language models
and what are the limits of
those models do you think?
So just for the task of natural language.
- Basically, the way
GPT is trained, right,
is you've just download a
massive amount of text data
from the internet and you
try to predict the next word
in a sequence, roughly
speaking you're predicting
little word chunks but
roughly speaking that's it.
And what's been really
interesting to watch is
basically, it's a language model.
Language models have actually
existed for a very long time.
There's papers on language
modeling from 2003, even earlier.
- Can you explain in that
case, what a language model is?
- Yeah, so language model,
just basically the rough idea
is just predicting the
next word in a sequence,
roughly speaking.
So there's a paper from, for
example, Bengio and the team
from 2003, where for the
first time they were using
a neural network to take
say like three or five words
and predict the next word.
And they're doing this
on much smaller data sets
and the neural net is not a transformer,
it's a multilayer perceptron
but it's the first time
that a neural network has
been applied in that setting.
But even before neural networks
there were language models
except they were using n-gram models.
So n-gram models are
just count-based models.
So if you try to take two
words and predict a third one,
you just count up how
many times you've seen
any two-word combinations
and what came next.
And what you predict as coming next
is just what you've seen the
most of in the training set.
And so language modeling has
been around for a long time.
Neural networks have done
language modeling for a long time.
So really what's new or
interesting or exciting
is just realizing that
when you scale it up
with a powerful enough
neural net, a transformer,
you have all these emergent properties
where basically what happens is
if you have a large
enough data set of text,
you are in the task of
predicting the next word.
You are multitasking a huge amount
of different kinds of problems.
You are multitasking,
understanding of chemistry,
physics, human nature, lots
of things are clustered
in that objective.
It's a very simple objective but actually,
you have to understand
a lot about the world
to make that prediction.
- You just said the U word
understanding, are you,
in terms of chemistry,
and physics, and so on,
what do you feel like it's doing?
Is it searching for the right context in,
what is the actual process happening here?
- Yeah, so basically,
it gets a thousand words
and it's trying to predict
a thousand and first.
And in order to do that very, very well
over the entire data set
available on the internet,
you actually have to basically
understand the context
of what's going on in there.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And it's a sufficiently hard problem
that if you have a
powerful enough computer,
like a transformer, you end
up with interesting solutions.
And you can ask it to
do all kinds of things
and it shows a lot of emergent properties
like in-context learning,
that was the big deal with GPT
and the original paper
when they published it,
is that you can just
prompt it in various ways
and ask it to do various things
and it will just kind of
complete the sentence.
But in the process of just
completing the sentence
it's actually solving all
really interesting problems
that we care about.
- Do you think it's doing
something like understanding,
like when we use the word
understanding for us humans?
- I think it's doing some understanding,
in its weights it understands
I think a lot about the world
and it has to in order
to predict the next word
in a sequence.
- So it's trained on the
data from the internet.
What do you think about this
approach in terms of data sets,
of using data from the internet?
Do you think the internet
has enough structured data
to teach AI about human civilization?
- Yeah, so I think the internet
has a huge amount of data.
I'm not sure if it's
a complete enough set.
I dunno that text is enough for having
a sufficiently powerful AGI as an outcome.
- Of course, there is audio,
and video, and images,
and all that kind of stuff.
- Yeah.
So text by itself I'm a
little bit suspicious about,
there's a ton of things we
don't put in text, in writing
just because they're obvious
to us about how the world works
and the physics of it
and that things fall.
We don't put that stuff in
text because why would you,
we share that understanding.
And so text is a communication
medium between humans
and it's not a all-encompassing
medium of knowledge
about the world.
But as you pointed out, we do have video,
and we have images, and we have audio.
And so I think that
definitely helps a lot.
But we haven't trained models sufficiently
across all those modalities yet.
So I think that's what a lot
of people are interested in.
- But I wonder what that
shared understanding
of what we might call common sense
has to be learned, inferred
in order to complete
the sentence correctly.
So maybe the fact that it's
implied on the internet
the model's gonna have to learn that
not by reading about it, by inferring it
in the representation.
So common sense, just like we,
I don't think we learn common
sense, like nobody says,
tells us explicitly, we
just figure it all out
by interacting with the world.
- [Andrej] Right.
- And so here's a model of reading about
the way people interact with the world.
It might have to infer that.
I wonder.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- You briefly worked on a
project called World of Bits,
training an RL system to
take actions on the internet
versus just consuming the
internet like we talked about.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Do you think there's a
future for that kind of system
interacting with the internet
to help the learning?
- Yes.
I think that's probably the final frontier
for a lot of these models,
so as you mentioned,
when I was at OpenAI,
I was working on this
project World of Bits
and basically, it was the
idea of giving neural networks
access to a keyboard and a mouse.
And the idea is that-
- What could possibly go wrong?
- So basically, you perceive
the input of the screen pixels
and basically, the state of
the computer is visualized
for human consumption in
images of the web browser
and stuff like that.
And then you give the
neural network the ability
to press keyboards and use the mouse
and we're trying to
get it to, for example,
complete bookings and
interact with user interfaces.
And-
- What'd you learn from that experience?
Like what was some fun stuff?
'Cause, that's a super cool idea.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- I mean it's like, yeah, I mean
the step between observer to actor.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Is a super fascinating step.
- Yeah.
Well, it's the universal interface
in the digital realm, I would say.
And there's a universal
interface in the physical realm,
which in my mind is a humanoid
form factor kind of thing.
We can later talk about
optimist and so on,
but I feel like they're a
similar philosophy in some way
where the physical world is
designed for the human form
and the digital world is
designed for the human form
of seeing the screen and
using keyboard and mouse.
And so it's the universal interface
that can basically command
the digital infrastructure
we've built up for ourselves.
And so it feels like a very
powerful interface to command
and to build on top of.
Now, to your question as to
what I learned from that,
it's interesting because the World of Bits
was basically too early I
think at OpenAI, at the time.
This is around 2015 or so.
And the zeitgeist at that
time was very different in AI
from the zeitgeist today.
At the time everyone was super excited
about reinforcement learning from scratch.
This is the time of the Atari paper
where neural networks
were playing Atari games
and beating humans in some
cases, AlphaGo, and so on.
So everyone's very excited
about training neural
networks from scratch,
using reinforcement learning directly.
It turns out that reinforcement learning
is extremely inefficient way
of training neural networks
because you're taking all these actions
and all these observations
and you get some sparse
rewards once in a while.
So you do all this stuff
based on all these inputs
and once in a while you're
told you did a good thing,
you did a bad thing and it's
just an extremely hard problem,
you can't learn from that.
You can burn a forest and you
can brute force through it.
And we saw that I think
with Go and Dota and so on,
and it does work, but
it's extremely inefficient
and not how you want to approach problems,
practically speaking.
And so that's the
approach that at the time
we also took to World of Bits.
We would have an agent
initialize randomly,
so he would keyboard mash, and mouse mash,
and try to make a booking.
And it just revealed the insanity
of that approach very quickly,
where you have to stumble
by the correct booking
in order to get a reward
of you did it correctly.
And you're never gonna stumble
by it by chance at random.
- So even with a simple web interface
there's too many options.
- There's just too many options
and it's two spars of a reward signal.
And you're starting
from scratch at the time
and so you don't know how to read,
you don't understand
pictures, images, buttons.
You don't understand what
it means to make a booking.
But now what's happened is
it is time to revisit that
and OpenAi is interested in this,
companies like Adept are
interested in this, and so on.
And the idea is coming
back because the interface
is very powerful but
now you're not training
an agent from scratch.
You are taking the GPT
as an initialization.
So GPT is pre-trained on all of text
and it understands what's a booking,
it understands what's a submit,
it understands quite a bit more.
And so it already has
those representations.
They are very powerful and
that makes all the training
significantly more efficient
and makes the problem tractable.
- Should the interaction
be the way humans see it,
with the buttons and the language,
or should it be with the
HTML, JavaScript, and the CSS?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- What do you think is the better?
- So today all this interaction
is mostly on the level
of HTML, CSS, and so on.
That's done because of
computational constraints.
But I think ultimately,
everything is designed
for human visual consumption
and so at the end of the day
there's all the additional
information is in the layout
of the webpage, and what's next to you,
and what's a red background,
and all this kind of stuff.
And what it looks like visually.
So I think that's the final frontier
is we are taking in pixels
and we're giving out keyboard,
mouse commands, but I think
it's impractical still today.
- Do you worry about bots on
the internet given these ideas,
given how exciting they are?
Do you worry about bots on
Twitter being not the stupid bots
that we see now with the crypto bots,
but the bots that might
be out there actually
that we don't see, that
they're interacting
in interesting ways.
So this kind of system
feels like it should be able
to pass the, I'm not a robot
click button, whatever.
Do you actually understand
how that test works?
I don't quite, there's
a checkbox or whatever
that you click.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- It's presumably tracking.
- [Andrej] Oh, I see.
- Like mouse movement
and the timing and so on.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- So exactly this kind of
system we're talking about
should be able to pass that.
So yeah.
What do you feel about bots
that are language models
plus have some interactability
and are able to Tweet
and reply and so on?
Do you worry about that world?
- Yeah, I think it's always
been a bit of an arms race
between the attack and the defense,
so the attack will get stronger
but the defense will get stronger as well.
Our ability to detect that.
- How do you defend, how do you detect,
how do you know that your Karpathy account
on Twitter is human?
How would you approach that,
like if people were to claim,
how would you defend
yourself in the court of law
that I'm a human, this account is human?
- Yeah, at some point I think it might be,
I think society will evolve a little bit.
We might start signing, digitally signing
some of our correspondence
or things that we create.
Right now it's not necessary
but maybe in the future, it might be.
I do think that we are
going towards the world
where we share the digital space with AIs.
- [Lex] Synthetic beings.
- Yeah.
And they will get much better
and they will share our digital realm
and they'll eventually share
our physical realm as well.
It's much harder but that's
kind of like the world
we're going towards.
And most of them will
be benign and helpful
and some of them will be malicious.
And it's going to be an arms
race trying to detect them.
- So, I mean the worst isn't the AIs,
the worst is the AIs
pretending to be human.
So, I don't know if it's always malicious.
There's obviously a lot
of malicious applications,
but it could also be if I was an AI
I would try very hard
to pretend to be human
because we're in a human world.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- I wouldn't get any respect as an AI.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- I wanna get some love and respect.
- I don't think the
problem is intractable.
People are thinking about
the proof of personhood.
- [Lex] Yes.
- And we might start
digitally signing our stuff
and we might all end up having like, yeah,
basically some solution
for proof of personhood.
It doesn't seem to me intractable,
it's just something that we
haven't had to do until now.
But I think once the need
really starts to emerge,
which is soon, I think people
will think about it much more.
- But that too will be
a race because obviously
you can probably spoof or
fake the proof of personhood.
So you have to try to figure out how to-
- [Andrej] Probably.
- I mean it's weird that we
have social security numbers,
and passports, and stuff.
It seems like it's harder to fake stuff
in the physical space.
But in the digital
space, it just feels like
it's gonna be very tricky.
Very tricky to out, 'cause it
seems to be pretty low cost
to fake stuff.
What are you gonna put an AI in jail
for trying to use a fake personhood proof?
I mean, okay, fine, you'll
put a lot of AIs in jail,
but there'll be more AIs,
like exponentially more.
The cost of creating a bot is very low
unless there's some kind
of way to track accurately.
Like you're not allowed
to create any program
without tying yourself to that program.
Any program that runs on the internet,
you'll be able to trace every
single human programming
that was involved with that program.
- [Andrej] Right.
Yeah.
Maybe you have to start declaring when,
we have to start drawing those boundaries
and keeping track of, okay,
what are digital entities
versus human entities
and what is the ownership
of human entities and digital entities
and something like that.
I don't know but I think I'm optimistic
that this is possible and in some sense
we're currently in the worst time of it
because all these bots suddenly
have become very capable
but we don't have defenses
yet built up as a society
but I think that doesn't
seem to me intractable,
it's just something that
we have to deal with.
- It seems weird that the Twitter bot,
like really crappy Twitter
bots, are so numerous.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- So I presume that the engineers
at Twitter are very good.
So it seems like what
I would infer from that
is it seems like a hard problem.
They're probably catching, alright,
if I were to sort of steel-man the case,
it's a hard problem
and there's a huge cost
to false positive to
removing a post by somebody
that's not a bot, that creates
a very bad user experience.
So they're very cautious about removing.
And maybe the bots are
really good at learning
what gets removed and not
such that they can stay ahead
of the removal process very quickly.
- My impression of it honestly,
is there's a lot of longing for it.
I mean.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- It's not subtle, is my impression of it.
It's not subtle.
- But you have, yeah, that's
my impression as well.
But it feels like maybe you're seeing
the tip of the iceberg,
maybe the number of
bots is in the trillions
and you have to like, just
it's a constant assault of bots
and you, I don't know, you
have to steel-man the case.
'Cause the bots I'm seeing
are pretty like obvious.
I could write a few lines of
code that catch these bots.
- Yeah.
I mean definitely, there's
a lot of longing for it.
But I will say I agree that if
you are a sophisticated actor
you could probably create
a pretty good bot right now
using tools like GPTs because
it's a language model.
You can generate faces
that look quite good now
and you can do this at scale.
And so I think, yeah, it's quite plausible
and it's going to be hard to defend.
- There was a Google engineer that claimed
that the LaMDA was sentient.
Do you think there's any inkling
of truth to what he felt?
And more importantly, to me at least,
do you think language models
will achieve sentience
or the illusion of sentience soonish?
- Yeah.
To me, it's a little bit of a
canary in a coal mine moment.
Honestly, a little bit because,
so this engineer spoke
to a chatbot at Google
and became convinced that
this bot is sentient.
- He asked it some existential
philosophical questions.
- And it gave reasonable answers
and looked real and so on.
So to me, it's a, he
wasn't sufficiently trying
to stress the system I think
and exposing the truth of it
as it is today.
But I think this will be
increasingly harder over time.
So yeah, I think more and more
people will basically become,
yeah, I think there will be
more people like that over time
as this gets better.
- Like form an emotional
connection to an AI?
- Yeah.
Perfectly plausible in my mind.
I think these AIs are actually quite good
at human connection, human emotion.
A ton of text on the
internet is about humans,
and connection, and love, and so on.
So I think they have a very
good understanding in some sense
of how people speak to
each other about this.
And they're very capable of creating
a lot of that kind of text.
There's a lot of like sci-fi
from fifties and sixties
that imagined AIs in a very different way.
They are calculating,
cold, Vulkan-like machines.
That's not what we're getting today.
We're getting pretty emotional AIs
that actually are very
competent and capable
of generating plausible-sounding text
with respect to all these topics.
- See I'm really hopeful about AI systems
that are companions that help you grow,
develop as a human being,
help you maximize long-term happiness.
But I'm also very worried about AI systems
that figure out from the internet
that humans get attracted to drama.
And so these would just
be like shit-talking AIs
that just constantly, did you hear?
They'll do gossip,
they'll try to plant seeds
of suspicion to other humans
that you love and trust.
And just kind of mess with people
'cause that's going to
get a lot of attention.
So drama, maximize drama.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- On the path to maximizing engagement
and us humans will feed into that machine.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And it'll be a giant drama shit storm-
So I'm worried about that.
So as the objective function
really defines the way
that human civilization
progresses with AIs in it.
- Yeah.
I think right now, at least today,
it's not correct to really think of them
as goal-seeking agents
that want to do something.
They have no long-term memory or anything,
a good approximation of it
is you get a thousand words
and you're trying to predict
a thousand of them first
and then you continue feeding it in
and you are free to prompt
it in whatever way you want.
So in text.
So you say okay you are a
psychologist and you are very good
and you love humans and
here's the conversation
between you and another human,
human column something, you something,
and then it just continues the pattern
and suddenly you're having a conversation
with a fake psychologist
who's trying to help you.
And so it's still kind
of a the realm of a tool,
people can prompt it in arbitrary ways
and it can create really incredible text
but it doesn't have long-term goals
over long periods of time.
So it doesn't look that way right now.
- Yeah.
But you can do short-term goals
that have long-term effects.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- So if my prompting short-term goal
is to get Andrej Karpathy to respond to me
on Twitter when I, I think
AI might, that's the goal,
but it might figure out
that talking shit to you,
it would be the best
in a highly sophisticated interesting way.
- [Andrej] Right.
- And then you build up a
relationship when you respond once
and then over time, it gets
to not be sophisticated
and just talk shit, and okay,
maybe you won't get to Andrej
but it might get to another celebrity,
it might get into other big accounts.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- So with just that simple
goal, get them to respond.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Maximize the probability
of actual response.
- Yeah.
I mean you could prompt a
powerful model like this
with its opinion about how to do
any possible thing you're interested in.
- [Lex] Yes.
- And they're kind of on
track to become these oracles,
I could think of it that way.
They are oracles currently it's just text
but they will have calculators,
they will have access to Google search,
they will have all kinds
of gadgets and gizmos.
They will be able to operate the internet
and find different information and yeah,
in some sense that's kinda like
currently what it looks like
in terms of the development.
- Do you think it'll be
an improvement eventually
over what Google is for
access to human knowledge?
It'll be a more effective search engine
to access human knowledge?
- I think there's definite scope
in building a better search engine today.
And I think Google,
they have all the tools,
all the people, they have
everything they need.
They have all the possible pieces,
they have people training
transformers at scale,
they have all the data.
It's just not obvious if they
are capable as an organization
to innovate on their
search engine right now
and if they don't someone else will.
There's absolute scope for
building a significantly better
search engine built on these tools.
- It's so interesting a large
company where the search,
there's already an
infrastructure, it works,
ads brings out a lot of money.
So where structurally inside a company
is their motivation to pivot.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- To say we're going to
build a new search engine.
- [Andrej] Yep.
- That's really hard.
- So it's usually going to
come from a startup, right?
- Yeah or some other more
competent organization.
So I don't know.
So currently for example, maybe
Bing has another shot at it,
as an example.
- [Lex] There you go, Microsoft Edge
as we're talking offline.
- It's really interesting
because search engines
used to be about okay here's some query,
here's web pages that look
like the stuff that you have.
But you could just directly go to answer
and then have supporting evidence.
And these models, basically,
they've read all the texts
and they've read all the web pages.
And so sometimes when you
see yourself going over
to search results and getting
a sense of the average answer
to whatever you're interested in,
that just directly comes out,
you don't have to do that work.
So they're kind of like-
Yeah, I think they have
a way to of distilling
all that knowledge into some
level of insight, basically.
- Do you think of prompting
as a teaching and learning,
like this whole process?
Like another layer?
'Cause maybe that's what humans are,
you already have that background model
and then the world is prompting you.
- Yeah, exactly.
I think the way we are
programming these computers now,
like GPTs, is converging
to how you program humans.
I mean, how do I program
humans via prompt?
I go to people and I
prompt them to do things,
I prompt them for information.
And so natural language prompt
is how we program humans
and we're starting to
program computers directly
in that interface.
It's pretty remarkable honestly.
- So you've spoken a lot about
the idea of Software 2.0.
All good ideas become cliches so quickly,
like the terms, it's kind of hilarious.
It's like, I think Eminem once said that
if he gets annoyed by a song
he's written very quickly,
that means it's gonna be a big
hit 'cause it's too catchy.
But can you describe this idea
and how you're thinking about
it has evolved over the months
and years since you coined it?
- Yeah.
Yeah.
So I had a blog post on Software 2.0,
I think several years ago now.
And the reason I wrote that post is
because I saw something
remarkable happening
in software development
and how a lot of code
was being transitioned to be written
not in C++ and so on, but it's written
in the weights of a neural net.
Basically just saying that neural nets
are taking over software,
the realm of software
and taking more and more and more tasks.
And at the time, I think not
many people understood this
deeply enough that this is a big deal.
This is a big transition.
Neural networks were seen as one
of multiple classification
algorithms you might use
for your dataset problem on Kaggle.
This is not that,
this is a change in how
we program computers.
And I saw neural nets as
this is going to take over,
the way we program computers
is going to change,
it's not going to be people
writing software in C++
or something like that
and directly programming the software.
It's going to be accumulating
training sets and data sets
and crafting these objectives
by which we train these neural nets.
And at some point, there's going
to be a compilation process
from the dataset and the objective
and the architecture
specification into the binary,
which is really just
the neural net weights
and the forward pass of the neural net
and then you can deploy that binary.
And so I was talking about that transition
and that's what the post is about.
And I saw this play
out in a lot of fields,
autopilot being one of them,
but also just a simple
image classification.
People thought originally,
in the eighties and so on,
that they would write the
algorithm for detecting a dog
in an image and they had all these ideas
about how the brain does it
and first, we detected corners
and then we detect lines
and then we stitched them up
and they were really going at it.
They were thinking about
how they're gonna write the algorithm
and this is not the way you build it.
And there was a smooth
transition where, okay,
first we thought we were
gonna build everything,
then we were building the features,
so HOG features and things like that
that detect these little
statistical patterns
from image patches.
And then there was a little
bit of learning on top of it,
a support vector machine
or binary classifier
for cat versus dog and images
on top of the features.
So we wrote the features but
we trained the last layer,
as the classifier.
And then people are like,
actually, let's not
even design the features
because we can't, honestly,
we're not very good at it.
So let's also learn the features.
And then you end up with
basically a compilation neural net
where you're learning most of it.
You're just specifying the architecture.
And the architecture has
tons of filled-in blanks,
which is all the knobs and
you let the optimization
write most of it.
And so this transition is happening
across the industry everywhere.
And suddenly we end up with a ton of code
that is written in neural net weights.
And I was just pointing
out that the analogy
is actually pretty strong
and we have a lot of
developer environments
for Software 1.0.
We have IDEs, how you work with code,
how you debug code, how do you run code,
how do you maintain code?
We have GitHub.
So I was trying to make those
analogies in the new realm,
what is the GitHub of Software 2.0?
Turns out it's something
that looks like Hugging Face right now?
And so I think some
people took it seriously
and built cool companies and many people
originally attacked the post.
It actually was not well
received when I wrote it
and I think maybe it has
something to do with the title,
but the post was not well
received and I think more people
have been coming around to it over time.
- Yeah.
So you were the Director of AI at Tesla
where I think this idea was
really implemented at scale,
which is how you have engineering
teams doing Software 2.0.
So can you linger on that idea of,
I think we're in the really early stages
of everything you just said,
which is like GitHub, IDEs,
how do we build
engineering teams that work
in Software 2.0 systems
and the data collection
and the data annotation,
which is all part of that Software 2.0.
What do you think is the task
of programming Software 2.0?
Is it debugging in the
space of hyper-parameters
or is it also debugging the space of data?
- Yeah, the way by which
you program the computer
and influence its algorithm
is not by writing the commands yourself.
You're changing mostly the data set.
You're changing the loss functions
of what the neural net is trying to do,
how it's trying to predict things.
But basically the data sets
and the architectures of the neural net.
And so in the case of the autopilot,
a lot of the data sets have
to do with, for example,
detection of objects
and lane line markings
and traffic lights and so on.
So you accumulate massive data sets of,
here's an example,
here's the desired label
and then here's roughly what
the algorithm should look like.
And that's a compilation neural net.
So the specification of the
architecture is like a hint
as to what the algorithm
should roughly look like.
And then the fill in the
blanks process of optimization
is the training process.
And then you take your
neural net that was trained,
it gives all the right
answers on your data set
and you deploy it.
- So in that case, perhaps at
all machine learning cases,
there's a lot of tasks.
So is coming up formulating a task
for a multi-headed neural network,
is formulating a task
part of the programming?
- [Andrej] Yeah, pretty much so.
- How you break down a
problem into a set of tasks.
- Yeah.
On a high-level, I would say
if you look at the software
running in the autopilot,
I give a number of talks on this topic.
I would say originally
a lot of it was written
in Software 1.0, imagine
lots of C++, right?
And then gradually, there was
a tiny neural net that was,
for example, predicting
given a single image,
is there a traffic light or not?
Or is there a lane line marking or not?
And this neural net
didn't have too much to do
in the scope of the software,
it was making tiny predictions
on an individual little image
and then the rest of the
system stitched it up.
So okay, we don't have
just a single camera,
we have eight cameras,
we actually have eight cameras over time.
And so what do you do
with these predictions?
How do you put them together?
How do you do the fusion
of all that information
and how do you act on it?
All of that was written by humans in C++.
And then we decided, okay,
we don't actually want
to do all of that fusion in the C++ code
because we're actually not good enough
to write that algorithm.
We want the neural nets
to write the algorithm
and we want to port all of that
software into the 2.0 stack.
And so then we actually had neural nets
that now take all the eight
camera images simultaneously
and make predictions for all of that.
So, and actually, they
don't make predictions
in the space of images.
They now make predictions directly in 3D
and, actually, in three
dimensions around the car.
And now, actually, we don't
manually fuse the predictions
in 3D over time we don't trust ourselves
to write that tracker.
So actually, we give the neural net
the information over time.
So it takes these videos now
and makes those predictions.
And so you're just like
putting more and more power
into the neural net processing
and at the end of it,
the eventual goal is to
have most of the software
potentially be in the 2.0 end
because it works significantly better.
Humans are just not very good
at writing software, basically.
- So the prediction is
happening in this 4D land.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Was three-dimensional world over time.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- How do you do annotation in that world?
So data annotation, whether
it's self-supervised
or manual by humans is a big part
of this Software 2.0 world.
- I would say by far in the industry,
if you're talking about the industry
and what is the technology
of what we have available?
Everything is supervised learning.
So you need data sets
of input, desired output
and you need lots of it.
And there are three properties
of it that you need.
You need it to be very large,
you need it to be accurate, no mistakes
and you need it to be diverse.
You don't want to just have a lot
of correct examples of one thing.
You need to really cover the space
of possibility as much as you can.
And the more you can cover
the space of possible inputs,
the better the algorithm
will work at the end.
Now once you have really good data sets
that you're collecting,
curating and cleaning,
you can train your neural
net on top of that.
So a lot of the work goes
into cleaning those data sets.
Now, as you pointed out,
the question is how do
you achieve a ton of-
If you want to basically predict in 3D,
you need data in 3D to back that up.
So in this video, we have eight videos
coming from all the cameras of the system
and this is what they
saw and this is the truth
of what actually was
around, there was this car
and there was this car, this car,
these are the lane line markings,
this is the geometry of the road.
There's a traffic light in this
three-dimensional position,
you need the ground truth.
And so the big question that
team was solving, of course,
is how do you arrive at that ground truth?
Because once you have a million of it
and it's large, clean and diverse,
then training a neural net
on it works extremely well
and you can ship that into the car.
And so there's many mechanisms
by which we collected that training data.
You can always go for human annotation,
you can go for simulation
as a source of ground truth,
you can also go for what
we call the offline tracker
that we've spoken about
at the AI Day and so on,
which is basically an automatic
reconstruction process
for taking those videos and recovering
the three-dimensional reality
of what was around that car.
So basically, think of
doing a three-dimensional
reconstruction as an offline thing
and then understanding that okay,
there's 10 seconds of
video, this is what we saw
and therefore here's all the
lane lines, cars and so on.
And then once you have that annotation,
you can train neural nets to imitate it.
- And how difficult is
the 3D reconstruction?
- [Andrej] It's difficult
but it can be done.
- So there's overlap between the cameras
and you do the reconstruction
and perhaps if there's any inaccuracy
so that's caught in the annotation step.
- Yes.
The nice thing about the annotation
is that it is fully offline.
You have infinite time, you
have a chunk of one minute
and you're trying to just offline
in a super-computer somewhere.
Figure out where were all the
positions of all the cars,
of all the people, and you
have your full one minute
of video from all the angles
and you can run all the
neural nets you want
and they can be very
efficient, massive neural nets,
they can be neural net that
can't even run in the car
later at test time.
So they can be even more
powerful neural nets
than what you can eventually deploy.
So you can do anything you want,
three-dimensional
reconstruction, neural nets,
anything you want just
to recover that truth
and then you supervise that truth.
- What have you learned?
You said no mistakes about
humans doing annotation
'cause there's like a range
of things they're good at
in terms of clicking stuff on screen.
How interesting is that to
you of a problem of designing
an annotator where humans
are accurate, enjoy it,
what are they even the
metrics, are efficient,
are productive, all that kind of stuff?
- Yeah, so I grew the
annotation team at Tesla
from, basically, zero to a
thousand while I was there.
That was really interesting.
My background is a PhD student researcher.
So growing that kind of
organization was pretty crazy.
But yeah, I think it's
extremely interesting
and part of the design process very much
behind the autopilot as
to where you use humans.
Humans are very good at
certain kinds of annotations.
They're very good, for example,
at two-dimensional annotations of images.
They're not good at
annotating cars over time
in three-dimensional space.
Very, very hard.
And so that's why we're very
careful to design the tasks
that are easy to do for humans
versus things that should be
left to the offline tracker.
Maybe the computer will
do all the triangulation
and 3D construction but the human will say
exactly these pixels of the image are car.
Exactly these pixels are human.
And so co-designing the
data annotation pipeline
was very much bread and
butter what I was doing daily.
- Do you think there's
still a lot of open problems
in that space?
Just in general annotation
where the stuff the machines
are good at, machines do
and the humans do what they're good at
and there's maybe some iterative process?
- Right.
I think to a very large extent,
we went through a number of iterations
and we learned a ton about
how to create these data sets.
I'm not seeing big open problems.
Originally, when I joined
I was really not sure
how this would turn out.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- But by the time I left
I was much more secure
and actually, we understand the philosophy
of how to create these data sets
and I was pretty comfortable
with where that was at the time.
- So what are strengths
and limitations of cameras
for the driving task in your understanding
when you formulate the
driving task as a vision task
with eight cameras, you've
seen that the entire,
most of the history of
the computer vision field
when it has to do with neural networks.
Just if you step back,
what are the strengths
and limitations of pixels,
of using pixels to drive?
- Yeah, pixels I think
are a beautiful sensory,
beautiful sensor I would say.
The thing is like cameras
are very, very cheap
and they provide a ton of
information, ton of bits.
So it's a extremely cheap
sensor for a ton of bits.
And each one of these bits is a constraint
on the state of the world.
And so you get lots of
megapixel images, very cheap
and it just gives you
all these constraints
for understanding what's
actually out there in the world.
So vision is probably the
highest bandwidth sensor.
It's a very high bandwidth sensor.
- I love that pixels is a
constraint on the world.
It's this highly complex,
high bandwidth constraint
on the stage of the world.
That's fascinating.
- It's not just that, but
again this real importance
of it's the sensor that humans use,
therefore everything is
designed for that sensor.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- The text, the writing,
the flashing signs,
everything is designed for vision and so,
and you just find it everywhere.
And so that's why that is the
interface you want to be in
talking again about these
universal interfaces
and that's where we
actually want to measure
the world as well and then
develop software for that sensor.
- But there's other constraints
on the state of the world
that humans use to understand the world.
I mean vision ultimately is the main one.
But we're referencing our
understanding of human behavior
and some common-sense physics
that could be inferred
from vision, from a
perception perspective.
But it feels like we're
using some kind of reasoning
to predict the world.
- [Andrej] Yeah, hundred percent.
- Not just the pixels.
- I mean you have a powerful prior service
for how the world evolves
over time, et cetera.
So it's not just about the likelihood term
coming up from the data itself telling you
about what you are observing,
but also the prior term of
what are the likely things to see
and how do they likely move and so on.
- And the question is how complex
is the range of possibilities
that might happen
in the driving task.
- [Andrej] Right.
- Is that to you still an open problem
of how difficult is driving,
philosophically speaking?
Of al the time you worked on driving,
do you understand how hard driving is?
- Yeah, driving is really hard
because it has to do with the predictions
of all these other agents
and the theory of mind
and what they're gonna do.
And are they looking at you?
Where are they looking?
What are they thinking?
- [Lex] Yeah.
- There's a lot that goes
there at the full tail-off,
the expansion of the nines
that we have to be
comfortable with eventually
the final problems are of that form.
I don't think those are the
problems that are very common.
I think eventually they're important
but it's really in the tail end.
- In the tail end, the rare edge cases.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- From the vision perspective,
what are the toughest parts
of the vision problem of driving?
- Well, basically, the
sensor is extremely powerful
but you still need to
process that information.
And so going from brightnesses
of these pixel values
to, hey, here are the
three-dimensional world,
is extremely hard and that's
what the neural networks
are fundamentally doing.
And so the difficulty really is in just
doing an extremely good job of engineering
the entire pipeline,
the entire data engine,
having the capacity to
train these neural nets,
having the ability to evaluate
the system and iterate on it.
So I would say just doing
this in production at scale
is the hard part, it's
an execution problem.
- So the data engine but also
the deployment of the system
such that has low latency performance.
So it has to do all these steps.
- Yeah.
For the neural nets
specifically just making sure
everything fits into the chip on the car.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And you have a finite budget of flops
that you can perform and memory bandwidth
and other constraints and you
have to make sure it flies
and you can squeeze in as much computer
as you can into the tiny.
- What have you learned from that process?
Because maybe that's one
of the bigger, new things,
coming from a research background,
where there's a system that has to run
under heavily constrained resources.
Has to run really fast.
What insights have you learned from that?
- Yeah, I'm not sure if
there's too many insights,
you're trying to create a neural net
that will fit in what you have available
and you're always trying to optimize it.
And we talked a lot about it on the AI Day
and, basically, the triple backflips
that the team is doing
to make sure it all fits
and utilizes the engine.
So I think it's extremely good engineering
and then there's all kinds of
little insights peppered in
on how to do it properly.
- Let's actually zoom out
'cause I don't think we
talked about the data engine,
the entirety of the layouts of this idea
that I think is just beautiful
with humans in the loop.
Can you describe the data engine?
- Yeah, the data engine is what I call
the almost biological feeling process
by which you perfect the training sets
for these neural networks.
So because most of the
programming now is in the level
of these data sets and
make sure they're large,
diverse and clean, basically
you have a data set
that you think is good,
you train your neural net,
you deploy it, and then you
observe how well it's performing
and you're trying to
always increase the quality
of your data set.
So you're trying to catch scenarios,
basically, that are, basically, rare.
And it is in these scenarios
that neural nets will
typically struggle in
because they weren't told
what to do in those rare cases
in the data set.
But now you can close the loop
because if you can now
collect all those at scale,
you can then feed them back
into the reconstruction process
I described and reconstruct
the truth in those cases
and add it to the dataset.
And so the whole thing
ends up being a staircase
of improvement of
perfecting your training set
and you have to go through deployments
so that you can mine the parts
that are not yet represented
well on the dataset.
So your dataset is basically imperfect.
It needs to be diverse, it
has pockets that are missing
and you need to pat out the pockets.
You can sort of think of
it that way in the data.
- What role do humans play in this?
So what's this biological
system like a human body
made up of cells?
What role?
How do you optimize the human system?
The multiple engineers collaborating,
figuring out what to focus
on, what to contribute,
which task to optimize
in this neural network.
Who's in charge of figuring
out which task needs more data?
Can you speak to the
hyperparameters, the human system?
- It really just comes down
to extremely good execution
from an engineering team that
knows what they're doing.
They understand intuitively
the philosophical insights
underlying the data engine and the process
by which the system
improves and how to, again,
delegate the strategy
of the data collection
and how that works.
And then just making sure it's
all extremely well executed.
And that's where most of the work,
it's not even the
philosophizing or the research
or the ideas of it.
It's just extremely good
execution is so hard
when you're dealing
with data at that scale.
- So your role in the
data engine executing well
and it is difficult and
extremely important.
Is there a priority of a
vision board of saying like,
we really need to get
better at stoplights?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- The prioritization of tasks?
- [Andrej] Yes.
- Is that essentially, and
that comes from the data?
- That comes to, a very large extent
to what we are trying to
achieve in the product roadmap.
The release we're trying
to get out and the feedback
from the QA team where the
system is struggling or not,
the things we're trying to improve.
- And the QA team gives some
signal, some information
in aggregate about the
performance of the system
in various conditions.
- That's right.
And then of course all of us drive it
and we can also see it.
It's really nice to work with a system
that you can also experience yourself.
It drives you home.
- Is there some insight you can draw
from your individual experience
that you just can't quite get
from an aggregate
statistical analysis of data?
- I would say so, yeah.
- [Lex] It's so weird, right?
- Yes.
- It's not scientific in a sense
'cause you're just one anecdotal sample.
- Yeah, I think there's a ton
of, it's a source of truth.
It's your interaction with the system.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And you can see it,
you can play with it,
you can perturb it, you
can get a sense of it,
you have an intuition for it.
I think numbers and plots
and graphs are much harder.
It hides a lot of-
- It's like if you train a language model,
it's a really powerful way is
by you interacting with it.
- [Andrej] Yeah, a hundred percent.
- Start try to build up an intuition.
- Yeah, I think Elon also,
he always wanted to
drive the system himself.
He drives a lot and I don't
wanna say almost daily.
So he also sees this as a source of truth,
you driving the system and
it performing and yeah.
- So what do you think?
Tough questions here.
So, Tesla, last year removed
radar from the sensor suite
and now just announce
that it's gonna remove
all ultrasonic sensors
relying solely on vision,
so camera only, does that
make the perception problem
harder or easier?
- I would almost reframe
the question in some way.
So the thing is basically,
you would think that additional sensors.
- Wait, wait, wait, can I just interrupt?
- [Andrej] Go ahead.
- I wonder if a language
model will ever do that
if you prompt it.
Let me reframe your question.
That would be epic.
That's the wrong prompt.
Sorry.
- Yeah, so it's a little
bit of a wrong question
because, basically, you would
think that these sensors
are an asset to you.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- But if you fully
consider the entire product
in its entirety, these sensors
are actually potentially a liability
because these sensors aren't free.
They don't just appear on your car.
Suddenly you have an entire supply chain,
you have people procuring it,
there can be problems with
them, they may need replacement.
They are part of the
manufacturing process.
They can hold back the
line in the production.
You need to source them,
you need to maintain them,
you have to have teams that
ride the firmware, all of it.
And then you also have
to incorporate them,
infuse them into the system in some way.
And so it actually bloats a lot of it.
And I think Elon is really
good at simplify, simplify,
best part is no part.
And he always tries to throw away things
that are not essential because
he understands the entropy
in organizations and an approach.
And I think in this case the cost is high
and you're not potentially seeing it
if you're just a computer vision engineer
and I'm just trying to improve my network
and is it more useful or less useful?
How useful is it?
And the thing is, if once
you consider the full cost
of a sensor, it actually
is potentially a liability
and you need to be really sure
that it's giving you
extremely useful information.
In this case, we looked at
using it or not using it
and the delta was not massive.
And so it's not useful.
- Is it also bloat in the data engine,
like having more sensors?
- Hundred percent.
- Is it a distraction?
- And these sensors, they
can change over time.
For example, you can have
one type of say radar,
you can have other type of radar.
They change over time.
Now suddenly you need to worry about it.
Now suddenly you have a
column in your sequel light
telling you, oh, what sensor type was it?
And they all have different distributions
and then they contribute noise
and entropy into everything
and they bloat stuff.
And also organizationally,
it's been really fascinating to me
that it can be very distracting.
If all you wanna get to work is vision,
all the resources are on it
and you're building out a data engine
and you're actually
making forward progress
because that is the sensor
with the most bandwidth,
the most constraints on the world.
And you're investing fully into that.
And you can make that extremely good.
You have only a finite amount
of sort of spend of focus
across different facets of the system.
- And this reminds me of Rich
Sutton, "The Bitter Lesson"
that just seems like
simplifying the system.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- In the long run.
And of course, you don't
know what the long run is
and it seems to be always
the right solution.
- Yeah.
Yes.
- In that case, it was for RL
but it seems to apply generally
across all systems that do computation.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- So what do you think about
the LiDAR as a crutch debate?
The battle between
point clouds and pixels?
- Yeah, I think this debate
is always slightly confusing
to me because it seems
like the actual debate
should be about do you
have the fleet or not.
That's the really important thing
about whether you can achieve
a really good functioning
of an AI system at this scale.
- [Lex] So data collection systems.
- Yeah.
Do you have a fleet or not is
significantly more important
whether you have LiDAR or not.
It's just another sensor.
And yeah, I think similar
to the radar discussion,
basically, yeah, I don't think it,
it basically doesn't
offer extra information.
It's extremely costly.
It has all kinds of problems.
You have to worry about it,
you have to calibrate it, et cetera.
It creates bloat and entropy.
You have to be really sure
that you need this sensor.
In this case, I basically
don't think you need it.
And I think honestly, I will
make a stronger statement.
I think some of the other
companies who are using it
are probably going to drop it.
- Yeah.
So you have to consider
the sensor in the full,
in considering can you build a big fleet
that collects a lot of data
and can you integrate that
sensor with that data,
and that sensor into a data engine
that's able to quickly find
different parts of the data
that then continuously improves
whatever the model that you're using.
- Yeah.
Another way to look at it
is like, vision is necessary
in a sense that the world is designed
for human visual consumption.
So you need vision, it's necessary.
And then also it is sufficient
because it has all the information
that you need for driving.
And humans obviously use vision to drive.
So it's both necessary and sufficient.
So you want to focus resources
and you have to be really sure
if you're going to bring in other sensors.
You could add sensors to infinity,
at some point you need to draw the line.
And I think in this case,
you have to really consider
the full cost of any one
sensor that you're adopting,
and do you really need it?
And I think the answer,
in this case, is no.
- So what do you think about the idea
that the other companies are
forming high-resolution maps
and constraining heavily
the geographic regions
in which they operate?
Is that approach, in your view,
not going to scale over time
to the entirety of the United States?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
I think-
- It'll take too long-
- As you've mentioned like they
pre-map all the environments
and they need to refresh the map
and they have a perfect
centimeter-level-accuracy map
of everywhere they're gonna drive.
It's crazy.
How are you going to, when
we're talking about autonomy
actually changing the
world, we're talking about
the deployment on the global scale
of autonomous systems for transportation.
And if you need to maintain
a centimeter-accurate map
for earth or for many cities
and keep them updated,
it's a huge dependency
that you're taking on,
a huge dependency.
It's a massive, massive dependency
and now you need to ask yourself,
do you really need it?
And humans don't need it, right?
So it's very useful to have
a low-level map of like,
okay, the connectivity of your road,
you know that there's a fork coming up.
When you drive in an environment,
you have that high-level understanding.
It's like a small Google map
and Tesla uses Google map,
similar resolution
information in its system,
but it will not pre-map environments
to centimeter-level accuracy.
It's a crutch, it's a distraction,
it causes entropy, and
it diffuses the team,
it dilutes the team
and you're not focusing
on what's actually necessary,
which is a computer vision problem.
- What did you learn
about machine learning,
about engineering, about
life, about yourself
as one human being from
working with Elon Musk?
- I think the most I've learned is about
how to run organizations efficiently
and how to create efficient organizations
and how to fight entropy
in an organization.
- So human engineering in
the fight against entropy.
- Yeah, I think Elon is
a very efficient warrior
in the fight against
entropy in organizations.
- What does entropy in an
organization look like exactly?
- It's process.
It's process and it's-
- Inefficiencies in the form meetings
and that kind of stuff?
- Yeah.
Meetings, he hates meetings,
he keeps telling people
to skip meetings if they're not useful.
He basically runs the
world's biggest startups,
I would say, Tesla, SpaceX are
the world's biggest startups.
Tesla actually is multiple startups,
I think it's better to
look at it that way.
And so I think he's
extremely good at that.
And yeah, he is a very good intuition
for streamlining process.
He's making everything efficient.
Best part is no part, simplifying,
focusing, and just kind
of removing barriers,
moving very quickly, making big moves.
All this is very startupy
sort of seeming things
but at scale.
- So strong drive to simplify.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- From your perspective, I mean,
that also probably applies
to just designing systems
and machine learning, and otherwise.
- Yeah.
- [Lex] like simplify, simplify.
- Yes.
- What do you think is
the secret to maintaining
the startup culture in
a company that grows?
Is there, can you introspect that?
- I do think he needs someone
in a powerful position
with a big hammer like
Elon who's the cheerleader
for that idea, and ruthlessly pursues it.
If no one has a big enough hammer,
everything turns into committees,
democracy within the company, process,
talking to stakeholders, decision-making,
Just everything just crumbles.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- If you have a big person
who is also really smart
and has a big hammer, things move quickly.
- So you said your favorite
scene in "Interstellar"
is the intense docking scene
with the AI and Cooper talking,
saying, "Cooper, what are you doing?
Docking.
It's not possible.
No, it's necessary."
Such a good line, by the way,
just so many questions there.
Why an AI in that scene presumably
is supposed to be able to
compute a lot more than the human
is saying it's not
optimal, why are the human,
I mean that's a movie,
but shouldn't the AI know
much better than the human?
Anyway, what do you think is the value
of setting seemingly impossible goals?
So like our initial intuition,
which seems like something
that you have taken on
that Elon espouses that
where the initial intuition
of the community might
say this is very difficult
and then you take it on
anyway, with a crazy deadline.
You, just from a human
engineering perspective,
have you seen the value of that?
- I wouldn't say that setting
impossible goals exactly
is a good idea but I think
setting very ambitious goals
is a good idea.
I think there's a, what
I call sublinear scaling
of difficulty, which
means that 10x problems
are not 10x hard.
Usually, 10x harder problem
is like two or three x
harder to execute on.
Because if you wanna actually,
like if you wanna improve a system by 10%,
it costs some amount of work.
And if you wanna 10x improve the system,
it doesn't cost you know,
a 100x amount of the work.
And it's because you
fundamentally change the approach.
And if you start with that constraint,
then some approaches are obviously dumb
and not going to work and
it forces you to reevaluate.
And I think it's a very interesting way
of approaching problem-solving.
- But it requires a
weird kind of thinking.
It's just going back to your PhD days.
It's like how do you think which ideas
in the machine learning
community are solvable?
- [Andrej] Yes.
- It requires, what is that?
I mean there's the cliche
of first principles thinking
but it requires to basically ignore
what the community is saying.
'Cause doesn't a community,
doesn't a community in science
usually draw lines of what
is and isn't possible?
- [Andrej] Right.
- And it's very hard to break out of that
without going crazy.
- Yeah.
I mean I think a good example here
is the deep learning
revolution in some sense
because you could be in
computer vision at that time,
during the deep learning
revolution of 2012 and so on.
You could be improving a
computer vision stack by 10%
or it can just be saying
actually all this is useless
and how do I do 10x
better computer vision?
Well, it's not probably by
tuning a HOG feature detector,
I need a different approach.
I need something that is scalable.
Going back to Richard Suttons
and understanding the philosophy
of the Bitter Lesson and then being like
actually, I need a much
more scalable system,
like a neural network
that in principle works.
And then having some deep
believers that can actually
execute on that mission, make it work.
So that's the 10x solution.
- What do you think is the
timeline to solve the problem
of autonomous driving?
That's still in part an open question.
- Yeah, I think the tough
thing with timelines
of self-driving obviously, is that no one
has created self-driving.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- So it's not like, what
do you think is a timeline
to build this bridge?
Well, we've built a
million bridges before,
here's how long that takes.
No one has built autonomy,
it's not obvious.
Some parts turn out to be
much easier than others.
So it's really hard to forecast.
You do your best based
on trend lines and so on
and based on intuition.
But that's why fundamentally
it's just really hard
to forecast this.
No one has-
- So even still like being inside of it,
it's hard to-
- Yes.
Some things turn out to be much harder
and some things turned
out to be much easier.
- Do you try to avoid making forecasts?
'Cause Elon doesn't avoid them, right?
And heads of car companies in the past
have not avoided it either.
Ford and other places
have made predictions
that we're gonna solve level-four driving
by 2020, 2021, whatever.
And they all backtrack on that prediction.
As an AI person, do you
feel yourself privately
make predictions or do they get in the way
of your actual ability
to think about a thing?
- Yeah, I would say what's easy to say
is that this problem is tractable
and that's an easy prediction to make.
It's tractable-
- So it's solvable?
- It's going to work.
Yes.
It's just really hard.
Some things turned out to be harder
and somethings turn out to be easier.
But it definitely feels tractable
and it feels like, at
least the team at Tesla,
which is what I saw internally,
is definitely on track to that.
- How do you form a strong representation
that allows you to make a
prediction about tractability?
So you're the leader a lot of humans,
you have to say this is actually possible.
- Yeah.
- How do you build up that intuition?
It doesn't have to be even driving,
it could be other tasks.
- [Andrej] Right.
- It could be, what difficult
tasks did you work on
in your life?
I mean classification, achieving certain,
just an image at certain level
of superhuman-level performance.
- Yeah, expert intuition.
It's just intuition, it's belief.
- So just like thinking about
it long enough, like studying,
looking at sample data,
like you said, driving.
My intuition is really flawed on this.
I don't have a good
intuition about tractability.
It could be anything.
It could be solvable.
The driving task could be simplified
into something quite trivial.
Like the solution to the
problem would be quite trivial.
And at scale, more and
more cars driving perfectly
might make the problem much easier.
The more cars you have driving,
like people learn how to drive
correctly, not correctly,
but in a way that's more
optimal for heterogeneous system
of autonomous, and semi-autonomous,
and manually driven cars,
that could change stuff.
Then again, also I've spent
a ridiculous number of hours
just staring at pedestrians
crossing streets,
thinking about humans.
And it feels like the way
we use our eye contact,
it sends really strong signals
and there's certain quirks
and edge cases of behavior.
And of course, a lot of
the fatalities that happen
have to do with drunk driving,
both on the pedestrian
side and the driver's side.
So there's that problem
of driving at night
and all that kind of.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- So I wonder, it's like the
space of possible solution
into autonomous driving includes
so many human factor issues
that it's almost impossible to predict.
There could be super
clean, nice solutions.
- Yeah.
I would say definitely,
to use a game analogy,
there's some fog of war,
but you definitely also see
the frontier of improvement and
you can measure historically
how much you've made progress.
And I think for example,
at least what I've seen
in roughly five years at Tesla.
When I joined it barely
kept lane on the highway.
I think going up from Palo Alto to SF
was like three or four interventions.
Anytime the road would
do anything geometrically
or turn too much it would just not work.
And so going from that to
like a pretty competent system
in five years and seeing what
happens also under the hood
and what the scale which
the team is operating now
with respect to data, and
compute, and everything else
is just massive progress.
- So you're climbing a
mountain and it's fog
but you're making a lot of progress.
- It's Fog.
You're making progress and you see
what the next directions are
and you're looking at some
of the remaining challenges
and they're not perturbing you,
and they're not changing your philosophy,
and you're not contorting yourself.
You're like, actually,
these are the things
that we still need to do.
- Yeah, it's the fundamental components
of solving the problem seem to be there,
from the data engine, to the compute,
to the compute on the car, to
the compute for the training,
all that kind of stuff.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- Over the years you've been at Tesla,
you've done a lot of
amazing breakthrough ideas
and engineering all of
it from the data engine
to the human side, all of it.
Can you speak to why you
chose to leave Tesla?
- Basically, as I
described, I think over time
during those five years
I've kind of gotten myself
into a little bit of
a managerial position.
Most of my days were meetings,
and growing the organization,
and making decisions about,
high-level strategic
decisions about the team
and what it should be
working on, and so on.
And it's kind of like a
corporate executive role.
And I can do it.
I think I'm okay at it.
But it's not like
fundamentally what I enjoy.
And so I think when I joined,
there was no computer vision team
because Tesla was just
going from the transition
of using MobilEye, a third-party vendor,
for all of its computer vision
to having to build its
computer vision system.
So when I showed up, there were two people
training deep neural networks.
And they were training them at a computer
at their legs, like
down, there was a work.
- There was some kind of
basic classification task.
- Yeah.
And so I like grew that into what I think
is a fairly respectable
deep learning team,
a massive computer cluster,
a very good data annotation organization.
And I was very happy with where that was.
It became quite autonomous
and so I stepped away
and I'm very excited to do much
more technical things again.
Yeah.
And kind of like we focus on AGI.
- What was that soul searching like?
'Cause you took a little
time off, I think,
how many mushrooms did you take?
No, I'm just kidding.
I mean, what was going through your mind?
The human lifetime is finite.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- You did a few incredible things.
You're one of the best
teachers of AI in the world.
You're one of the best.
And I mean that in the best possible way.
You're one of the best
tinkerers in the AI world.
Meaning like understanding
the fundamentals
of how something works by
building it from scratch
and playing with the basic intuitions.
It's like Einstein, Fineman,
were all really good
at this kind of stuff.
Like small example of a
thing, to play with it,
to try to understand it.
So that, and obviously now with Tesla,
you helped build a team
of machine learning
engineers and a system that
actually accomplishes something
in the real-world.
So given all that, what was
the soul searching like?
- Well, it was hard because obviously,
I love the company a lot, and
I love Elon, I love Tesla,
so it was hard to leave.
I love the team, basically.
But yeah, I think I actually,
I really potentially
interested in revisiting it,
maybe coming back at some
point, working in Optimus,
working in AGI at Tesla.
I think Tesla's going
to do incredible things.
It's basically a massive
large-scale robotics
kind of company with a
ton of in-house talent
for doing real incredible things.
And I think human robots
are going to be amazing.
I think autonomous transportation
is going to be amazing.
All this is happening at Tesla.
So I think it's just a
really amazing organization.
So being part of it and helping it along
I think was very, basically,
I enjoyed that a lot.
Yeah, it was basically
difficult for those reasons
because I love the company.
But I'm happy to potentially at some point
come back for act two.
But I felt like at this
stage I built the team,
it felt autonomous and I became a manager
and I wanted to do a lot
more technical stuff.
I wanted to learn stuff.
I wanted to teach stuff.
And I just felt like it was a good time
for a change of pace a little bit.
- What do you think is
the best movie sequel
of all time speaking of part two?
'Cause most of 'em suck.
- Movie sequels?
- Movie sequels, yeah.
And you Tweet about movies.
So just a tiny tangent, what's
a favorite movie sequel?
"Godfather Part II"?
Are you a fan of "Godfather"?
'Cause you didn't even Tweet
or mention "The Godfather".
- Yeah, I don't love that movie.
I know it has a-
- We're gonna edit that out.
We're gonna edit out the
hate towards "The Godfather".
How dare you disrespect?
- I think I will make a strong statement.
I don't know why but I
basically don't like any movie
before 1995, something like that.
- Didn't you mention "Terminator 2".
- Okay.
Okay.
That's like a, "Terminator
2" was a little bit later.
1990...
- No, I think "Terminator
2" was in the eighties.
- And I like "Terminator" one as well,
So, okay.
So a few exceptions but by and large
for some reason, I don't like movies
before 1995 or something.
They feel very slow.
The camera is like zoomed out.
It's boring, it's kind of
naive, it's kind of weird.
- And also Terminator was
very much ahead of its time.
- Yes.
And "The Godfather", there's like no AGI.
- I mean but you have, "Good Will Hunting"
was one of the movies you mentioned
and that doesn't have any AGI either.
I guess it has mathematics.
- Yeah, I guess occasionally,
I do enjoy movies
that don't feature.
- Or like "Anchorman" that has no, that's.
- "Anchorman" is so good.
- I don't understand, speaking of AGI,
'cause I don't understand
why Will Ferrell is so funny.
It doesn't make sense.
It doesn't compute.
There's just something about him.
And he's a singular human.
'Cause, you don't get that
many comedies these days.
And I wonder if it has
to do about the culture
or the Machine of Hollywood
or does it have to do with
just we got lucky with
certain people in comedy
that came together, 'cause
he is a singular human.
- Yeah, yeah.
I love his movies.
- That was a ridiculous
tangent, I apologize.
But you mentioned humanoid robots.
So what do you think about
Optimus, about Tesla Bot?
Do you think we'll have
robots in the factory
and in the home in 10,
20, 30, 40, 50 years?
- Yeah.
I think it's a very hard project.
I think it's going to take a while,
but who else is going to
build human robots at scale?
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And I think it is a very
good form factor to go after
because like I mentioned
the world is designed
for humanoid form factor.
These things would be able
to operate our machines.
They would be able to sit down in chairs,
potentially even drive cars.
Basically, the world
is designed for humans,
that's the form factor
you want to invest into
and make work over time.
I think, there's another
school of thought which is,
okay, pick a problem and
design a robot to it.
But actually, designing a robot
and getting a whole data engine
and everything behind it to work
is actually an incredibly hard problem.
So it makes sense to go
after general interfaces
that, okay, they are not
perfect for any one given task,
but they actually have the
generality of just with a prompt,
with English, able to do something across.
And so I think it makes a lot of sense
to go after a general interface
in the physical world.
And I think it's a very difficult project.
It's going to take time, but
I've seen no other company
that can execute on that vision.
I think it's going to be amazing.
Basically, physical labor,
if you think transportation
is a large market, try physical labor.
It's insane.
- But it's not just physical labor, to me,
the thing that's also exciting
is the social robotics.
So the relationship we'll
have on different levels
with those robots.
- Yeah.
- That's why I was really
excited to see Optimus.
People have criticized
me for the excitement,
but I've worked with
a lot of research labs
that do humanoid-legged robots,
Boston Dynamics, Unitree.
There's a lot of companies
that do legged robots,
but that's the elegance of the movement
is a tiny, tiny part of the big picture.
So the two big exciting
things to me about Tesla
doing humanoid or any legged robots
is clearly integrating
into the data engine.
So the data engine aspect,
so the actual intelligence
for the perception and the
control and the planning
and all that kind of stuff.
Integrating into this huge,
the fleet that you mentioned.
Right.
And then speaking of
fleet, the second thing is
the mass manufacturers just knowing
culturally driving towards a simple robot
that's cheap to produce at scale.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And doing that well, having
experience to do that well,
that changes everything.
That's why that's a very different culture
and style than Boston Dynamics.
Who by the way, those robots are just-
The way they move, it'll
be a very long time
before Tesla could achieve
the smoothness of movement.
But that's not what it's about.
It's about the entirety of the system.
Like we talked about the
data engine and the fleet.
- [Andrej] Right.
- And that's super exciting,
even the initial sort of models.
But that too was really surprising
that in a few months you
can get a pro a prototype.
- Yep.
And the reason that
happened very quickly is,
as you alluded to, there's
a ton of copy-paste
from what's happening in the autopilot.
A lot.
The amount of expertise that
came out of the woodworks
at Tesla for building the human
robot was incredible to see.
Basically, Elon said at
one point we're doing this
and then next day, basically,
all these CAD models
started to appear and people
talk about the supply chain
and manufacturing.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And people showed up with
Screwdrivers and everything
the other day and started to
like put together the body.
And I was like, whoa.
All these people exist at Tesla.
And fundamentally building a car
is actually not that different
from building a robot.
And that is true not just
for the hardware pieces.
And also let's not forget
hardware, not just for a demo,
but manufacturing of
that hardware at scale
is a whole different thing.
But for software as well,
basically, this robot
currently thinks it's a car.
- It's gonna have a midlife
crisis at some point.
- It thinks it's a car.
Some of the earlier demos,
actually, we were talking about
potentially doing them
outside in the parking lot
because that's where all
of the computer vision
was working out of the box.
- [Lex] That's Funny.
- Instead of inside.
But all the operating system,
everything just copy-pastes,
computer vision mostly copy-paste.
I mean you have to
retrain the neural nets,
but the approach and
everything and data engine
and offline trackers
and the way we go about
the occupancy tracker and so on.
Everything copy-paste,
you just need to retrain the neural nets.
And then the planning control, of course,
has to change quite a bit,
but there's a ton of copy-paste
from what's happening at Tesla.
And if you were to go
with goal of like, okay,
let's build a million human
robots and you're not Tesla,
that's a lot to ask, if you're at Tesla,
it's actually like, that's not that crazy.
- And then the follow-up question is then
how difficult, just like with driving,
how difficult is the manipulation task?
- [Andrej] Yep.
- Such that it can have
an impact at scale?
I think depending on the context,
the really nice thing
about robotics is that,
unless you do a manufacturer
and that kind of stuff,
is there is more room for error?
- [Andrej] Yep.
- Driving is so safety-critical
and also time critical,
a robot is allowed to move
slower, which is nice.
- Yes.
I think it's going to take a long time.
But the way you want to
structure the development
is you need to say, okay, it's
going to take a long time.
How can I set up the
product development roadmap
so that I'm making revenue along the way?
I'm not setting myself up
for a zero-one-loss function
where it doesn't work until it works.
You don't wanna be in that position.
You want to make it
useful almost immediately.
And then you want to slowly deploy it and-
- [Lex] At scale, hopefully.
- At scale and you want to
set up your data engine,
your improvement loops, the
telemetry, the evaluation,
the harness and everything.
And you want to improve the product
over time, incrementally.
And you're making revenue along the way.
That's extremely important
because otherwise, you cannot build
these large undertakings,
just don't make sense economically.
And also from the point of
view of the team working on it,
they need the dopamine along the way.
They're not just going to make a promise
about this being useful.
This is going to change the
world in 10 years when it works.
This is not where you want to be.
You want to be in a place
like I think autopilot today
where it's offering increased safety
and convenience of driving today.
People pay for it, people
like it, people purchase it.
And then you also have the greater mission
that you're working towards.
- And you see that.
So the dopamine for the team,
that was the source of happiness?
- Yes, hundred percent,
you're deploying this.
People like it, people
drive it, people pay for it,
they care about it.
There's all these YouTube
videos, your grandma drives it.
She gives you feedback.
People like it, people engage with it.
You engage with it.
Huge.
- Do people that drive
Teslas recognize you
and give you love?
Like, hey thanks for this
nice feature that it's doing.
- Yeah, I think the tricky thing is
some people really love you,
some people, unfortunately,
you're working on something that you think
is extremely valuable, useful, et cetera,
some people do hate you.
There's a lot of people
who hate me and the team
and the whole project.
And I think-
- Are they Tesla drivers?
- Many cases they're not, actually.
- Yeah.
That actually makes me sad about humans
or the current ways that humans interact.
I think that's actually fixable.
I think humans want to
be good to each other.
I think Twitter and social
media is part of the mechanism
that actually somehow makes
the negativity more viral
that it doesn't deserve,
disproportionately add a
viral boost of negativity.
But I wish people would
just get excited about,
so suppress some of the jealousy,
some of the ego and just
get excited for others.
And then there's a karma aspect to that.
You get excited for others,
they'll get excited for you.
Same thing in academia,
if you're not careful,
there is a dynamical system there.
If you think of in silos and get jealous
of somebody else being successful
that actually perhaps counterintuitively
leads the less productivity
of you as a community
and you individually.
I feel like if you keep
celebrating others,
that actually makes you more successful.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And I think people haven't,
depending on the industry,
haven't quite learned that yet.
- Yeah.
Some people are also very
negative and very vocal.
So they're very prominently featured.
But actually, there's a ton of
people who are cheerleaders,
but they're silent cheerleaders.
And when you talk to
people just in the world,
they will all tell you
it's amazing, it's great.
Especially like people who understand
how difficult it is to
get this stuff working.
People who have built products
and makers and entrepreneurs,
making this work and changing
something is incredibly hard.
Those people are more
likely to cheerlead you.
- Well, one of the
things that makes me sad
is some folks in the robotics community
don't do the cheerleading and they should
'cause they know how difficult it is.
Well, they actually sometimes don't know
how difficult it is to
create a product at scale.
Right?
- [Andrej] Yep.
- They actually deploy in the real-world.
A lot of the development
of robots and AI systems
is done on very specific small benchmarks
and as opposed to real-world additions.
- Yes.
Yeah.
I think it's really
hard to work on robotics
in academic setting.
- Or AI systems that
apply in the real-world.
You've criticized, you
flourished, and loved
for time the ImageNet,
the famed ImageNet dataset
and have recently had
some words of criticism
that the academic research ML community
gives a little too much
love still to the ImageNet
or those kinds of benchmarks.
Can you speak to the strengths
and weaknesses of data sets
used in machine learning research?
- Actually, I don't know that
I recall the specific instance
where I was unhappy or
criticizing ImageNet.
I think ImageNet has
been extremely valuable.
It was basically a benchmark that allowed
the deep learning community to demonstrate
that deep neural nets actually work.
- [Lex] Yes.
- There's a massive value in that.
So I think ImageNet was
useful, but basically,
it's become a bit of an
EMNIST at this point.
So EMNIST is like little
28 by 28 grayscale digits.
That's kind of a joke data set
that everyone just crushes.
- There's still papers written
on EMNIST though, right?
Like strong papers?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Like papers that focus
on like how do we learn
with a small amount of
data, that kinda stuff.
- Yeah.
Yeah, I could see that being helpful
but not in mainline
computer vision research
anymore, of course.
- I think the way I've
heard you just somewhere,
maybe I'm just imagining things,
but I think you said like
ImageNet was a huge contribution
to the community for a long time
and now it's time to
move past those kinds of-
- Well, ImageNet has been crushed.
I mean, the error rates are, yeah,
we're getting like 90% accuracy
in 1000 classification way prediction
and I've seen those images
and this is like really
high, that's really good.
If I remember correctly,
the top five error rate
is now like 1% or something.
- Given your experience with a
gigantic real-world data set,
would you like to see benchmarks move
into certain directions that
the research community uses?
- Unfortunately, I don't think academics
currently have the next ImageNet.
We've obviously, I think
we've crushed EMNIST.
We've basically crushed ImageNet
and there's no next-big benchmark
that the entire community
rallies behind and uses
for further development of these networks.
- Oh, yeah.
I wonder what it takes for a dataset
to captivate the imagination of everybody.
Like where they all get behind it.
That could also need a leader, right?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Somebody with popularity.
I mean that, yeah, why
did ImageNet takeoff?
Is it just the accident of history?
- It was the right amount of difficult,
it was the right amount
of difficult and simple
and interesting enough
it was the right time
for that kind of a data set.
- Question from Reddit.
What are your thoughts on
the role that synthetic data
and game engines will play in the future
of neural net model development?
- I think as neural
nets converge to humans,
the value of simulation to neural nets
will be similar to value
of simulation to humans.
So people use simulation
because they can learn something
in that kind of a system
and without having
to actually experience it.
- But you're referring to the
simulation we do in our head?
Isn't that what thinking is?
- Oh no, sorry.
Simulation, I mean like
video games or other forms
of simulation for various professionals.
- Well, so let me push back on that
'cause maybe there's simulation
that we do in our heads,
like simulate if I do this,
what do I think will happen?
- [Andrej] Okay.
That's like internal simulation.
- Yeah, internal.
Isn't that what we're doing?
Assuming before we act.
- Oh, yeah.
But that's independent
from the use of simulation
in the sense of computer
games, or using simulation
for training set creation, or something.
- Is it independent or is
it just loosely correlated?
'Cause isn't that useful
to do counterfactual
or edge case simulation to what happens
if there's a nuclear war?
What happens if there's,
like those kinds of things?
- Yeah.
That's a different simulation
from Unreal Engine.
That's how I interpreted the question.
- Ah, so like simulation
of the average case?
What's Unreal Engine?
What do you mean by Unreal Engine?
So simulating a world.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- The physics of that world,
Why is that different?
'Cause you also can add
behavior to that world
and you could try all
kinds of stuff, right?
You could throw all kinds
of weird things into it.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Unreal Engine is not
just about simulating,
I mean I guess it is about simulating
the physics of the world,
it's also doing something with that.
- Yeah.
The graphics, the physics, and the agents
that you put into the
environment and stuff like that.
Yeah.
- I feel like you said that
it's not that important,
I guess, for the future of AI development.
Is that correct, to
interpret you that way?
- Well, I think, humans use simulators
and they find them useful and so computers
will use simulators and find them useful.
- Okay, so you're saying it's not,
I don't use simulators very often.
I play a video game every once in a while
but I don't think I derive any wisdom
about my own existence
from those video games.
It's a momentary escape from reality
versus a source of wisdom about reality.
So I think that's a very
polite way of saying
simulation is not that useful.
- Yeah.
Maybe not.
I don't see it as a fundamental,
really important part
of training neural nets currently.
But I think as neural nets
become more and more powerful,
I think you will need fewer examples
to train additional behaviors.
And simulation is, of
course, there's a domain gap
in a simulation that's not the real-world,
it's slightly something different.
But with a powerful enough neural net
you need the domain gap
can be bigger I think
because neural net will understand
that even though it's not the real-world,
it has all this high-level structure
that I'm supposed to learn from.
- So the neural net will actually, yeah,
it will be able to leverage
the synthetic data better?
- [Andrej] Yes.
- By closing the gap but understanding
in which ways this is not real data?
- [Andrej] Exactly.
- Reddit do better questions next time.
That was a question.
No, I'm just kidding.
All right, so is it
possible, do you think,
speaking of EMNIST to
construct neural nets
and training processes that
require very little data.
So we've been talking about huge data sets
like the internet for training.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- I mean one way to say
that is like you said,
the querying itself is another
level of training I guess
and that requires a little data.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- But do you see any
value in doing research
and going down the direction
of can we use very little data
to construct a knowledge base?
- A hundred percent.
I just think at some point
you need a massive data set
and then when you pre-train
your massive neural net
and get something that is
like a GPT or something,
then you're able to be very efficient
at training any arbitrary new task.
So a lot of these GPTs you can do tasks
like sentiment analysis,
or translation, or so on,
just by being prompted
with very few examples.
Here's the kind of thing I want you to do.
Like here's an input sentence,
here's the translation into German,
input sentence, translation to German,
input sentence, blank, and the neural net
will complete the translation to German
just by looking at the
example you've provided.
And so that's an example
of a very few shot learning
in the activations of the neural net,
instead of the weights of the neural net.
And so I think basically just like humans,
neural nets will become
very data efficient
at learning any other new task.
But at some point, you
need a massive data set
to pre-train your network.
- I do get that.
And probably, we humans
have something like that.
Do we have something like that?
Do we have a passive in the background,
background model constructing thing
that just runs all the time
in a self-supervised way?
We're not conscious of it?
- I think humans definitely,
I mean obviously,
we learn a lot during our lifespan,
but also we have a ton of hardware
that helps us, the initialization
coming from evolution.
And so I think that's also
a really big component.
A lot of people in the field,
I think they just talk about
the amounts of like seconds
that a person has lived,
pretending that this is a tabula rasa,
a zero initialization of a neural net.
And it's not.
You can look at a lot of
animals for example, zebras.
Zebras get born, and they
see, and they can run,
there's zero training
data in their lifespan.
They can just do that.
So somehow, I have no idea
how, evolution has found a way
to encode these algorithms
and these neural net initializations
that are extremely good into ATCGs.
And I have no idea how this works,
but apparently, it's possible
because here's proof by existence.
- There's something magical about
going from a single-cell
to an organism that is born
to the first few years of life.
I like the idea that the reason
we don't remember anything
about the first few years of our life
is that it's a really painful process.
Like it's a very difficult
challenging training process.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Like intellectually and maybe, yeah,
I mean I don't, why don't
we remember any of that?
That might be some crazy training going on
and maybe that's the
background model training
that is very painful.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And so it's best for the
system once it's trained
not to remember how it was constructed.
- I think it's just like the
hardware for long-term memory
is just not fully developed.
- [Lex] Sure.
- I feel like the first
few years of infants,
it's not actually like
learning, it's brain maturing.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- We're born premature
and there's a theory
along those lines because
of the birth canal
and the swelling of the brain.
And so we're born premature
and then the first few years
we're just, the brain's maturing
and then there's some learning eventually.
It's my current view on it.
- What do you think, do
you think neural nets
can have long-term memory?
Like that approach is
something like humans?
Do you think there needs to
be another meta-architecture
on top of it to add something
like a knowledge base
that learns facts about the world
and all that kind of stuff?
- Yes, but I don't know to what extent
it will be explicitly constructed.
It might take on intuitive forms
where you are telling the GPT,
hey, you have a declarative memory bank
to which you can store
and retrieve data from
and whenever you
encounter some information
that you find useful just
save it to your memory bank.
And here's an example of
something you have retrieved
and here's how you say it and
here's how you load from it.
You just say, load whatever,
you teach it in text,
in English and then it might learn
to use a memory bank from that.
- Oh, so the neural
net is the architecture
for the background model, the base thing
and then everything else
is just on top of it.
- It's not just a text, right?
You're giving it gadgets and gizmos.
So you're teaching it some
kind of a special language
by which it can save arbitrary information
and retrieve it at a later time.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And you're telling
about these special tokens
and how to arrange them
to use these interfaces.
It's like, hey, you can use a calculator,
here's how you use it.
Just do five three plus four one equals
and when equals is there,
a calculator will actually
read out the answer
and you don't have to
calculate it yourself
and you just tell it in English,
this might actually work.
- Do you think in that
sense Gato is interesting,
the DeepMind system that
it's not just new language
but actually throws it
all in the same pile,
images, actions, all that kind of stuff.
That's basically what
we're moving towards.
- Yeah, I think so.
So Gato is very much a
kitchen sink of an approach
to reinforcement learning in
lots of different environments
with a single fixed transformer model.
Right?
I think it's a very early
result in that realm.
But I think, yeah, it's along the lines
of what I think things
will eventually look like.
- Right.
So this is the early days of a system
that eventually will look like this,
from a Rich Sutton perspective.
- Yeah.
I'm not a super huge fan of,
I think all these interfaces
that like look very different.
I would want everything to be
normalized into the same API.
So for example, screen
pixels, very same API
instead of having like
different world environments
that have very different
physics and joint configurations
and appearances and whatever.
And you're having some
kind of special tokens
for different games that you can plug.
I'd rather just normalize
everything to a single interface
so it looks the same to the
neural net if that makes sense.
- So it's all gonna be
pixel-based Pong in the end?
- [Andrej] I think so.
- Okay.
Let me ask you about
your own personal life.
A lot of people wanna know
you're one of the most productive
and brilliant people in the history of AI.
What is a productive day in the life
of Andrej Karpathy look like?
What time do you wake up?
'Cause imagine some kind of dance between
the average productive day
and a perfect productive day.
So the perfect productive day
is the thing we strive towards
and the average is kind
of what it converges to,
given all the mistakes and
human eventualities and so on.
- [Andrej] Yep.
- So what time did you wake up?
Are you a morning person?
- I'm not a morning person.
I'm a night owl, for sure.
- Is it stable or not?
- It's semi-stable like eight or nine
or something like that.
During my PhD, it was even
later, I used to go to sleep
usually at 3:00 AM, I think
the AM hours are precious
and a very interesting time to work
because everyone is asleep.
At 8:00 AM or 7:00 AM
the east coast is awake.
So there's already activity,
there's already some
text messages, whatever.
There's stuff happening.
You can go on some news website
and there's stuff
happening, it's distracting.
At 3:00 AM everything is totally quiet
and so you're not gonna be bothered
and you have solid chunks
of time to do work.
So I like those periods,
night owl by default.
And then I think productive time,
basically, what I like to
do is you need to build
some momentum on the problem
without too much distraction
and you need to load your
ram, your working memory
with that problem.
And then you need to be obsessed with it
when you're taking shower,
when you're falling asleep,
you need to be obsessed with the problem
and it's fully in your memory
and you're ready to wake up
and work on it right there.
- So is this in a scale
temporal scales of a single day
or a couple of days a week, a month?
- Yeah.
So I can't talk about one day, basically,
in isolation because it's a whole process.
When I wanna get
productive in the problem,
I feel like I need a span of a few days
where I can really get in on that problem
and I don't wanna be interrupted
and I'm going to just
be completely obsessed
with that problem.
And that's where I do most
of my good work, I would say.
- You've done a bunch of cool,
like little projects in a
very short amount of time,
very quickly, so that requires
you just focusing on it.
- Yeah, basically, I need
to load my working memory
with the problem and I
need to be productive
because there's always a huge fixed cost
to approaching any problem.
I was struggling with
this for example at Tesla
because I want to work on
small side project, but okay,
you first need to figure out,
oh, okay, I need to
associate into my cluster,
I need to bring up a VS Code
editor so I can work on this.
I ran into some stupid error
because of some reason.
You're not at a point
where you can be just
productive right away.
You are facing barriers.
And so it's about really
removing all of that barrier
and you're able to go into the problem
and you have the full problem
loaded in your memory.
- And somehow avoiding distractions
of all different forms.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- Like news stories, emails,
but also distractions
from other interesting projects
that you previously worked on
or currently working on and so on.
You just wanna really focus your mind.
- Yeah.
And I mean I can take some
time off for distractions
and in between, but I
think it can't be too much.
Most of your day is sort
of spent on that problem.
And then, I drink coffee,
I have my morning routine,
I look at some news, Twitter, Hacker News,
Wall Street Journal, et cetera.
It's great.
- So basically, you wake
up, you have some coffee,
are you trying to get to
work as quickly as possible?
Do you take in this diet of
what the hell's happening
in the world first?
- I do find it interesting
to know about the world.
I don't know that it's useful or good,
but it is part of my routine right now.
So I do read through a
bunch of news articles
and I wanna be informed
and I'm suspicious of it.
I'm suspicious of the practice,
but currently, that's where I am.
- Oh, you mean suspicious
about the positive effect?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Of that practice on your
productivity and your well-being?
- My well-being, psychologically, yeah.
- And also on your ability to
deeply understand the world
because there's a bunch
of sources of information
you're not really focused
on deeply integrating it.
- Yeah, it's a little bit distracting.
Yeah.
- In terms of a perfectly productive day
for how long of a stretch
of time in one session
do you try to work and focus on a thing?
Is it a couple hours, is it
one hour, is it 30 minutes?
Is it 10 minutes?
- I can probably go a small few hours
and then I need some breaks in between
for food and stuff and yeah.
But I think, it's still really
hard to accumulate hours.
I was using a tracker that
told me exactly how much time
I spent coding any one day.
And even on a very productive day,
I still spent only six or eight hours.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And it's just because there's
so much padding, commute,
talking to people, food, et cetera.
There's a cost of life
just living and sustaining
and homeostasis and just
maintaining yourself
as a human is very high.
- And there seems to be a
desire within the human mind
to participate in society
that creates that padding.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- 'Cause the most productive
days I've ever had
is just completely from start to finish
is tuning out everything.
- [Andrej] Yep.
- And just sitting there
and then you could do more
than six in eight hours.
- Yep.
- Is there some wisdom about
what gives you strength
to do tough days of long focus?
- Yeah, just whenever I get
obsessed about a problem,
something just needs to work.
Something just needs to exist.
- It needs to exist.
So you're able to deal with
bugs and programming issues
and technical issues and design decisions
that turn out to be the wrong ones.
You're able to think through all of that
given that you want a thing to exist.
- Yeah, it needs to exist.
And then I think to me
also a big factor is,
are other humans are
going to appreciate it?
Are they going to like it?
That's a big part of my motivation.
If I'm helping humans and they seem happy,
they say nice things, they
Tweet about it or whatever,
that gives me pleasure because
I'm doing something useful.
- So you do see yourself
sharing it with the world?
With GitHub, with the blog
post or through videos?
- Yeah, I was thinking about it like,
suppose I did all these
things but did not share them.
I don't think I would have
the same amount of motivation
that I can build up.
- You enjoy the feeling of
other people gaining value
and happiness from the
stuff you've created.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- What about diet?
I saw you played with
intermittent fasting.
Do you fast?
Does that help?
- I play with everything.
- With the things you played,
what's been most beneficial
to your ability to
mentally focus on a thing
and just mental
productivity and happiness?
You still fast?
- Yeah.
I still fast but I do intermittent fasting
but really what it means
at the end of the day
is I skip breakfast.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- So I do 18/6 roughly by default
when I'm in my steady
state, if I'm traveling
or doing something else
I will break the rules.
But in my steady state, I do 18/6.
So I eat only from 12:00 to 6:00.
Not a hard rule and I break it
often, but that's my default.
And then, yeah, I've done a
bunch of random experiments
for the most part right now
where I've been for the last
year and a half I wanna say
is I'm plant-based or plant-forward.
I heard plant-forward, it sounds better.
- [Lex] What does that mean exactly?
- I don't actually know
what the difference is,
but it sounds better in my mind.
But it just means I prefer
plant-based food and-
- Raw or cooked.
- I prefer cooked and plant-based.
- So plant-based, forgive me,
I don't actually know
how wide the category
of plant entails.
- Well, plant-based just means
that you're not militant
about it and you can flex
and you just prefer to eat
plants and you're not making,
you're not trying to
influence other people.
And you come to someone's house party
and they serve you a steak
that they're really proud of,
you will eat it.
- Yes.
Right.
You're not judgmental.
That's beautiful.
I mean, I'm the flip side of that,
but I'm very sort of flexible.
Have you tried doing one meal a day?
- I have accidentally
but not consistently,
but I've accidentally had that.
I don't like it.
I think it makes me feel not good.
It's too much of a hit.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And so currently I have
about two meals a day,
12:00 and 6:00, probably.
- I do that nonstop.
I'm doing it now.
I do one meal a day.
- [Andrej] Okay.
- It's interesting.
It's an interesting feeling.
Have you ever fasted longer than a day?
- Yeah, I've done a bunch of water fasts.
'Cause I was curious what happens.
- [Lex] What happens,
anything interesting?
- Yeah, I would say so.
I mean, what's interesting
is that you're hungry
for two days and then
starting day three or so,
you're not hungry.
It's such a weird feeling
because you haven't eaten in a few days
and you're not hungry.
- Yeah, isn't that weird?
- [Andrej] It's really weird.
- One of the many weird
things about human biology.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- It figures something out,
it finds another source of
energy or something like that.
Or relaxes the system.
I don't know how it works.
- Yeah, the body is like,
"You're hungry, you're hungry."
And then it just gives up.
It's like, "Okay, I
guess we're fasting now."
There's nothing.
And then it's just focuses on
trying to make you not hungry
and not feel the damage of
that and trying to give you
some space to figure
out the food situation.
- So are you still to this
day most productive at night?
- I would say I am,
but it is really hard to
maintain my PhD schedule.
Especially, when I was say
working at Tesla and so on.
It's a non-starter.
But even now, people want
to meet for various events.
Society lives in a certain period of time.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And you have to work with that.
- It's hard to do a social thing
and then after that return and do work.
- Yeah.
It's just really hard.
- That's why I try,
when I do social thing,
I try not to do too much drinking
so I can return and continue doing work.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- But at Tesla is there
conversions, not Tesla,
but any company, is there a
convergence to always a schedule
or is that how humans behave
when they collaborate?
I need to learn about this?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Do they try to keep
a consistent schedule
where you're all awake at the same time?
- I mean, I do try to create a routine
and I try to create a steady state
in which I'm comfortable in.
So I have a morning routine,
I have a day routine.
I try to keep things to a steady state
and things are predictable
and then your body just sticks to that.
And if you try to stress
that a little too much,
it will create, when you're traveling
and you're dealing with jet lag,
you're not able to really
ascend to where you need to go.
- Yeah.
Yeah.
That's weird too about us humans
with the habits and stuff.
What are your thoughts
on work-life balance
throughout a human lifetime?
So Tesla in part was
known for pushing people
to their limits, in terms
of what they're able to do,
in terms of what they're trying to do,
in terms of how much they
work, all that kind of stuff.
- Yeah, I mean I will say Tesla
gets a little too much bad rep for this
because what's happening is Tesla,
it's a bursty environment.
So I would say the baseline,
my only point of reference is Google
where I've interned three times
and I saw what it's like
inside Google and DeepMind,
I would say the baseline
is higher than that.
But then there's a punctual equilibrium
where once in a while there's a fire
and people work really hard
and so it's spiky and bursty
and then all the stories get collected-
- [Lex] Above the bursts.
Yeah.
- And then it gives the
appearance of total insanity.
But actually, it's just a
bit more intense environment
and there are fires and sprints
and so I think definitely
though I would say
it's a more intense environment
than something you would get at Google.
- But in your personal,
forget all of that,
just in your own personal life,
what do you think about the
happiness of a human being?
A brilliant person like yourself.
about finding a balance
between work and life
or is such a thing not a
good thought experiment?
- Yeah, I think balance is good
but I also love to have sprints
that are out of distribution
and that's when I think I've
been pretty creative as well.
- So sprints out of distribution
means that most of the time
you have a quote-unquote balance.
- I have balance most of the
time and I like being obsessed
with something once in a while.
- Once in a while is what, once a week,
once a month, once a year?
- Yeah.
Probably I'd like say
once a month or something.
Yeah.
- And that's when we get and
you get Git-Repo for market.
- Yeah.
That's when you're like
really care about a problem,
it must exist.
This will be awesome.
You're obsessed with it and
now you can't just do it
on that day, you need
to pay the fixed cost
of getting into the groove.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And then you need to
stay there for a while
and then society will come
and they will try to mess with you
and they will try to distract you.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Yeah.
The worst thing is a person who's like,
"I just need five minutes of your time."
- [Lex] Yeah.
- The cost of that is not five minutes.
- [Lex] Yes.
- And society needs to
change how it thinks about
just five minutes of your time.
- Right.
It's never just one minute, just 30.
Just a quick thing.
- [Andrej] What's the big deal?
Why are you being, so?
- Yeah, no.
What's your computer setup?
What's like the perfect-
Are you somebody that's flexible
to no matter what laptop, four screens?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Or do you prefer a certain setup
that you're most productive with?
- I guess the one that I'm familiar with
is one large screen, 27-inch
and my laptop on the side.
- What operating system?
- I do MaX, that's my primary.
- For all tasks?
- I would say OS X.
But when you're working on deep-learning,
everything is Linux,
you're SSH into a cluster
and you're working remotely.
- But what about the actual development?
Like using the IDE?
- Yeah.
You would use, I think a good
way is you just run VS Code,
my favorite editor right now on your Mac.
But you are actually, you have
a remote folder through SSH.
So the actual files
that you're manipulating
are on a cluster somewhere else.
- So what's the best IDE, VS Code?
What else do people use?
So I use Emax, still.
- That's old school.
- It may be cool, I don't know
if it's maximum productivity.
So what do you recommend
in terms of editors?
You worked with a lot
of software engineers,
editors for Python, C++,
machine learning applications.
- I think the current answer is VS Code,
currently, I believe that's the best IDE.
It's got a huge amount of extensions.
It has GitHub Copilot integration,
which I think is very valuable.
- What do you think about
the Copilot integration?
I got to talk a bunch
with Guido van Rossum
who's the creator of Python
and he loves Copilot,
he programs a lot with it.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Do you?
- Yeah, I use Copilot.
I love it.
And it's free for me
but I would pay for it.
Yeah.
I think it's very good.
And the utility that I found with it was,
I would say there's a learning curve
and you need to figure
out when it's helpful
and when to pay attention to its outputs
and when it's not going to be helpful
where you should not pay attention to it.
Because if you're just reading
its suggestions all the time,
it's not a good way of
interacting with it.
But I think I was able to
sort of mold myself to it.
I find it's very helpful,
number one, in copy-paste
and replace some parts.
So when the pattern is clear,
it's really good at
completing the pattern.
And number two, sometimes it suggests APIs
that I'm not aware of.
So it tells you about
something that you didn't know.
- And that's an opportunity
to discover a new thing.
- It's an opportunity to.
So I would never take
Copilot code as given.
I almost always copy-paste
into a Google search
and you see what this function is doing
and then you're like, "Oh,
that's actually exactly
what I need."
Thank you, Copilot.
So you learn something.
- So it's in part of search engine,
in part maybe getting the
exact syntax correctly
that once you see it, it's that MPR thing.
Once you see it, you know it's correct.
- [Andrej] Yes, exactly.
Exactly.
- You, yourself can struggle.
- [Andrej] You can verify.
- You can verify efficiently
but you can't generate efficiently.
- And Copilot really, I mean
it's autopilot for programming.
Right?
And currently is doing the link following
which is the simple copy-paste
and sometimes suggest,
but over time it's going to
become more and more autonomous.
And so the same thing will
play out in not just coding
but actually across many, many
different things probably.
- But coding is an important one, right?
- [Andrej] Very.
- Like writing programs.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- How do you see the
future of that developing
the program synthesis, like
being able to write programs
that are more and more complicated?
'Cause right now it's
human-supervised in interesting ways.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- It feels like the transition
will be very painful.
- My mental model for it is
the same thing will happen
as with the autopilot.
So currently, he's doing lane following,
he is doing some simple
stuff, and eventually,
we'll be doing autonomy
and people will have to
intervene less and less.
And those could be like
testing mechanisms.
If it writes a function
and that function looks
pretty damn correct.
But how do you know it's correct
'cause you're like
getting lazier and lazier
as a programmer, your ability
to, 'cause like little bugs
but I guess it won't make little mistakes.
- No it will, Copilot will make off
by one subtle bug.
It has done that to me.
- But do you think future systems will
or is it really the off by one
is actually a fundamental
challenge of programming.
- In that case it wasn't fundamental
and I think things can improve but yeah,
I think humans have to supervise.
I am nervous about people not
supervising what comes out
and what happens to, for example,
the proliferation of bugs
in all of our systems.
I'm nervous about that but I
think there will probably be
some other Copilots for bug finding
and stuff like that, at some point.
'Cause there'll be a
lot more automation for-
- Oh man, a Copilot that
generates a compiler,
one that does a linter.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- One that does like a type checker.
- Yeah.
It's a committee of a GPT sort of like-
- And then there'll be like
a manager for the committee.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And then there'll be somebody that says,
a new version of this is needed.
We need to regenerate it.
- Yeah.
There were 10 GPTs that were forwarded
and gave 50 suggestions.
Another one looked at it and picked a few
that they like, a bug one looked at it
and it was like, it's probably
a bug, they got re-ranked
by some other thing and then
a final ensemble GPT comes in
and is like, okay, given
everything you guys have told me,
this is probably the next token.
- You know the feeling is
the number of programmers
in the world has been growing
and growing very quickly.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Do you think it's possible
that it'll actually level out
and drop to a very low
number in this kind of world?
'Cause then you'll be doing
Software 2.0 programming
and you'll be doing this generation
of Copilot-type systems programming.
But you won't be doing the old school
Software 1.0 programming.
- I don't currently think
that they're just going to
replace human programmers.
I'm so hesitant saying
stuff like this, right?
- Yeah.
Because this is gonna be
replayed in five years and no,
it's going to show that like
this is where we thought,
because I agree with you
but I think we might be
very surprised, right?
What's your sense of where we
stand with language models?
Does it feel like the beginning,
or the middle, or the end?
- The beginning, a hundred percent.
I think the big question in my mind is
for sure GPT will be able
to program quite well,
competently and so on.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- How do you steer the system?
You still have to provide some guidance
to what you actually are looking for.
And so how do you steer
it and how do you say,
how do you talk to it?
How do you audit it and verify
that what it's done is correct
and how do you work with this?
And it's as much not just an AI problem
but a UI, UX problem.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- So beautiful fertile ground
for so much interesting work
for VS Code++ where you're not just,
it's not just human programming anymore.
It's amazing.
- Yeah.
So you're interacting with the system
so not just one prompt but
it's iterative prompting.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- You're trying to figure
out, having a conversation
with the system.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- That actually, I mean to
me that's super exciting
to have a conversation with
the program I'm writing.
- Yeah.
Yeah.
Maybe at some point you're
just conversing with it.
It's like, okay, here's what I wanna do,
actually this variable.
Maybe it's not even that
low-level as a variable, but.
- You can also imagine
like can you translate
this to C++ and back
to Python and back to?
- Yeah, that already kind
of exists in some way.
- No, but just like doing it as part
of the program experience.
Like I think I'd like to
write this function in C++
or you just keep changing
from different programs
'cause of the different syntax,
maybe I want to convert this
into a functional language.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And so you get to become
multilingual as a programmer
and dance back and forth efficiently.
- Yeah.
I mean I think the UI, UX of it though
is still very hard to think through.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Because it's not just
about writing code on a page.
You have an entire developer environment,
you have a bunch of hardware on it,
you have some environmental variables,
you have some scripts that
are running in a Chrome job.
There's a lot going on
to working with computers
and how do these systems
set up environment flags,
and work across multiple machines,
and set up screen sessions,
and automate different processes.
like how all that works and is
auditable by humans and so on
is like massive question at the moment.
- You've built arxiv-sanity.
What is arxiv and what is the future
of academic research publishing
that you would like to see?
- So arxiv is this pre-print server.
So if you have a paper you
can submit it for publication
to journals or conferences
and then wait six months
and then maybe get a
decision pass or fail,
or you can just upload it to arxiv
and then people can Tweet
about it three minutes later.
And then everyone sees
it, everyone reads it,
and everyone can profit from
it in their own little ways.
- And you can cite it and it
has an official look to it.
It feels like a publication process.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- It feels different than if
you just put in a blog post.
- Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
I mean it's a paper and
usually the bar is higher
for something that you
would expect on arxiv
as opposed to something you
would see in a blog post.
- Well, the culture created the bar
'cause you could probably post
a pretty crappy paper or an arxiv.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- So what's that make you feel like,
what's that make you
feel about peer review?
So rigorous peer review
by two, three experts
versus the peer review
of the community right
as it's written?
- Yeah.
Basically, I think the
community is very well able
to peer-review things
very quickly on Twitter.
And I think maybe it
just has to do something
with AI machine learning
field specifically though,
I feel like things are
more easily auditable
and the verification is easier potentially
than the verification somewhere else.
So it's like, you can think of these
scientific publications
as little block-chains
where everyone's building
on each other's work
and citing each other
and you sort of have AI,
which is this much faster
and loose blockchain,
but then you have, and
any one individual entry
is very cheap to make.
And then you have other
fields where maybe that model
doesn't make as much sense.
And so I think in AI at least
things are pretty easily verifiable.
And so that's why when
people upload papers,
they have a really good idea and so on.
People can try it out the next day
and they can be the final arbiter
of whether it works or not
on their problem.
And the whole thing just
moves significantly faster.
So I feel like academia still has a place,
sorry, this conference, journal
process still has a place,
but it's sort of it lags behind I think,
and it's a bit more maybe
higher quality process.
But it's not the place
where you will discover
cutting-edge work anymore.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- It used to be the case
when I was starting my PhD
that you go to conferences and journals
and you discuss all the latest research.
Now when you go to a
conference or a journal,
no one discusses anything that's there
because it's already like three
generations ago, irrelevant.
- Yes.
Which makes me sad about
like DeepMind for example,
where they still publish in nature
and these big prestigious,
I mean there's still value,
I suppose to the prestige that
comes with these big venues.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- But the result is that they'll announce
some breakthrough performance
and it'll take like a year to
actually publish the details.
I mean, and those details,
if they were published
immediately would inspire
the community to move in
certain directions, would they?
- Yeah.
It would speed up the
rest of the community,
but I don't know to what
extent that's part of their
objective function also.
- That's true.
So it's not just the prestige.
A little bit of the delay is part.
- Yeah, they certainly,
DeepMind specifically,
has been working in the regime
of having slightly higher
quality basically process
and latency and publishing
those papers that way.
- Another question from Reddit.
Do you or have you suffered
from imposter syndrome,
being the director of AI
Tesla, being this person
when you're at Stanford
where the world looks at you
as the expert in AI to teach the world
about machine learning.
- When I was leaving
Tesla after five years,
I spent a ton of time in meeting rooms
and I would read papers.
In the beginning, when I joined
Tesla, I was writing code
and then I was writing less and less code,
and I was reading code
and then I was reading
less and less code.
And so this is just a natural progression
that happens I think.
And definitely, I would
say near the tail end,
that's when it starts
to hit you a bit more.
That you're supposed to be an expert
but actually, the source
of truth is the code
that people are writing, the GitHub
and the actual code itself.
And you're not as familiar
with that as you used to be.
And so I would say maybe
there's some insecurity there.
- Yeah, that's actually pretty profound,
that a lot of the insecurity has to do
with not writing the code
in the computer science space
'cause that is the truth.
That right there.
- The code is the source of truth.
The papers and everything else,
it's a high-level summary.
I don't, yeah, just a high-level summary,
but at the end of the day
you have to read code.
It's impossible to translate all that code
into actual paper form.
So when things come out,
especially when they have
a source code available,
that's my favorite place to go.
- So like I said, you're
one of the greatest teachers
of machine learning AI
ever from CS231n to today,
what advice would you give to beginners
interested in getting
into machine learning?
- Beginners are often
focused on what to do
and I think the focus should
be more how much you do.
So I am a believer on the high-level,
in this 10,000 hours concept
where you just have to
just pick the things
where you can spend time
and you care about and
you're interested in.
You literally have to put
in 10,000 hours of work.
It doesn't even matter
as much where you put it,
you'll iterate and you'll improve
and you'll waste some time.
I dunno if there's a better way.
You need to put in 10,000 hours.
But I think it's actually really nice
'cause I feel like there's
some sense of determinism
about being an expert at a thing
if you spend 10,000 hours.
you can literally pick an arbitrary thing
and I think if you spend 10,000 hours
of deliberate effort and work,
you actually will become an expert at it.
And so I think it's like a nice thought.
And so basically I would focus more on
are you spending 10,000 hours?
That's what I would focus on.
- And then thinking about what
kind of mechanisms maximize
your likelihood of
getting to 10,000 hours.
- [Andrej] Yes, exactly.
- Which for us silly humans
means probably forming
a daily habit of every single
day actually doing thing.
- Whatever helps you.
So I do think to a large extent
it's a psychological problem for yourself.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- One other thing that I think is helpful
for the psychology of it,
is many times people compare themselves
to others in the area, I
think this very harmful.
Only compare yourself to
you from some time ago.
Like say a year ago, are you
better than you a year ago?
This is the only way to think.
And I think then you can see your progress
and it's very motivating.
- That's so interesting.
That focus on the quantity of hours.
'Cause I think a lot of
people in the beginner stage
but actually throughout get
paralyzed by the choice.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Like which one do I pick
this path or this path?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- They'll literally get
paralyzed by which IDE to use?
- Well, they're worried, yeah,
they'll worried about all these things.
But the thing is, you will waste
time doing something wrong.
- [Lex] Yes.
- You will eventually
figure out it's not right.
You will accumulate scar tissue
and next time you'll grow stronger
because next time you'll
have the scar tissue,
and next time you'll learn from it.
And now next time you come
to a similar situation
you'll be like, oh, I messed up.
I've spent a lot of time working on things
that never materialized into anything
and I have all that scar tissue
and I have some intuitions
about what was useful,
what wasn't useful, how things turned out.
So all those mistakes were not dead work.
So I just think they should
just focus on working.
What have you done, what
have you done last week?
- That's a good question actually
to ask for a lot of things,
not just machine learning.
It's a good way to cut the,
I forgot the term we use,
but the fluff, the blubber,
whatever the inefficiencies in life.
What do you love about teaching?
You seem to find yourself often
in the, drawn to teaching.
You're very good at it but
you're also drawn to it.
- Yeah, I mean I don't
think I love teaching.
I love happy humans and happy
humans like when I teach.
- Yes.
- I wouldn't say I hate
teaching, I tolerate teaching.
- [Lex] Yes.
- But it's not like the act
of teaching that I like,
it's that I have something,
I'm actually okay at it.
- [Lex] Yes.
- I'm okay at teaching and
people appreciate it a lot.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And so I'm just happy
to try to be helpful
and teaching itself is not like the most,
I mean it can be really
annoying, frustrating.
I was working on a bunch
of lectures just now.
I was reminded back to my days of 231n
just how much work it is to
create some of these materials
and make them good.
The amount of iteration and thought
and you go down blind alleys
and just how much you change it.
So creating something good
in terms of educational value
is really hard and it's not fun.
- It's difficult.
So people should definitely
go watch your new stuff you put out.
There are lectures where you're
actually building the thing,
like you said, "The code is truth."
So discussing back-propagation
by building it,
by looking through and
just the whole thing.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- So how difficult is that to prepare for?
I think that's a really
powerful way to teach.
Did you have to prepare for that
or are you just live thinking through it?
- I will typically do like say three takes
and then I take the better take.
So I do multiple takes and I
take some of the better takes
and then I just build
out a lecture that way.
Sometimes I have to delete
30 minutes of content.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Because it just went down the alley
that I didn't like too much.
So there's about a bunch of iteration
and it probably takes me
somewhere around 10 hours
to create one hour of content.
- To get one hour.
It's interesting.
I mean is it difficult
to go back to the basics?
Do you draw a lot of wisdom
from going back to the basics?
- Yeah, going back to
backropagation, loss functions,
where they come from.
And one thing I like about
teaching a lot honestly is
it definitely strengthens
your understanding.
So it's not a purely altruistic activity,
it's a way to learn.
If you have to explain
something to someone,
you realize you have gaps in knowledge.
And so I even surprised
myself in those lectures like,
well, the result will
obviously look like this
and then the result doesn't look like it.
And I'm like, okay, I
thought I understood this.
- Yeah.
Well, that's why it's really
cool, they literally code,
you run it in the notebook
and it gives you a result
and you're like, oh, wow.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- And like actual numbers,
actual input, actual code.
- Yeah.
It's not mathematical symbols, et cetera.
The source of truth is the code.
It's not slides, it's
just like let's build it.
- It's beautiful.
You're a rare human in that sense.
What advice would you give to researchers
trying to develop and publish an idea
that have a big impact in the world of AI?
So maybe undergrads, maybe
early-graduate students.
- Yeah.
I mean I would say they
definitely have to be
a little bit more
strategic than I had to be
as a PhD student because
of the way AI is evolving,
it's going the way of physics.
Where in physics you used
to be able to do experiments
on your bench-top and everything was great
and you could make progress
and now you have to work
in like LHC or like CERN and so AI
is going in that direction as well.
So there's certain kinds of things
that's just not possible to
do on the bench-top anymore.
And I think that didn't used
to be the case at the time.
- Do you still think that
there's like GAN type papers
to be written where like very simple idea.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- That requires just one computer
to illustrate a simple example?
- I mean one example that's
been very influential recently
is diffusion models,
diffusion models are amazing.
Diffusion models are six years old.
For the longest time,
people were ignoring them
as far as I can tell.
And they're an amazing generative model,
especially in images and so
stable diffusion and so on,
it's all diffusion-based.
Diffusion is new, it was
not there and it came from,
well, it came from Google but a researcher
could have come up with it.
In fact, some of the first, actually no,
those came from Google as well.
But a researcher could come up with that
in an academic institution.
- Yeah.
What do you find most fascinating
about diffusion models?
So from the societal impact
of the technical architecture.
- What I like about diffusion
is it works so well.
- Is that surprising to you?
The amount of the variety,
almost the novelty
of the synthetic data it's generating?
- Yeah, so the stable diffusion
images are incredible.
It's the speed of improvement
in generating images
has been insane.
We went very quickly from
generating tiny digits
to tiny faces and it all looked messed up.
And now we have stable diffusion
and that happened very quickly.
There's a lot that academia
can still contribute.
For example, FlashAttention
is a very efficient kernel
for running the attention
operation inside the transformer
that came from academic environment.
It's a very clever way
to structure the kernel,
that's the calculation.
So it doesn't materialize
the attention matrix.
And so, I think there's
still like lots of things
to contribute but you have
to be just more strategic.
- Do you think neural networks
could be made to reason?
- Yes.
- Do you think they already reason?
- Yes.
- [Lex] What's your
definition of reasoning?
- Information processing.
- So in the way that humans
think through a problem
and come up with novel ideas,
it feels like a reasoning.
- Yeah.
- So the novelty, I don't wanna say
but auto-distribution ideas,
you think it's possible?
- Yes.
And I think we're seeing that already
in the current neural nets.
You're able to remix the
training set information
into true generalization in some sense.
- That doesn't appear-
- It doesn't appear verbatim
in the training set.
You're doing something
interesting algorithmically,
you're manipulating some symbols
and you're coming up with
some correct unique answer
in a new setting.
- What would illustrate to you, holy shit,
this thing is definitely thinking?
- To me thinking or reasoning
is just information
processing and generalization.
And I think the neural
nets already do that today.
- So being able to perceive the world
or perceive the, whatever the inputs are
and to make predictions based on that
or actions based on that's reasoning?
- Yeah.
You're giving correct
answers in novel settings
by manipulating information.
You've learned the correct algorithm,
you're not doing just some
kind of a lookup table
and nearest neighbor search.
Something like that.
- Let me ask you about AGI.
What are some moonshot ideas
you think might make
significant progress towards AGI
and maybe another way is,
what are the big blockers
that we're missing now?
- So basically, I am fairly
bullish on our ability
to build AGIs, basically automated systems
that we can interact with
that are very human-like
and we can interact with them
in a digital realm or a physical realm.
Currently, it seems most of the models
that do these magical
tasks are in a text realm.
I think, as I mentioned, I'm
suspicious that text realm
is not enough to actually
build full understanding
of the world.
I do actually think you
need to go into pixels
and understand the physical
world and how it works.
So I do think that we need
to extend these models
to consume images and videos
and train on a lot more data
that is multimodal in that way.
- Do you think you need to touch the world
to understand it also?
- Well, that's the big open question
I would say in my mind,
is if you also require
the embodiment and the ability
to interact with the world,
run experiments and have
a data of that form,
then you need to go to Optimus
or something like that.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And so I would say Optimus
in some way is like a hedge
in AGI because it seems
to me that it's possible
that just having data from
the internet is not enough.
If that is the case, then
Optimus may lead to AGI.
Because Optimus would, to me,
there's nothing beyond Optimus.
You have like this humanoid form factor
that can actually do stuff in the world.
You can have millions of them
interacting with humans and so on.
And if that doesn't give a
rise to AGI at some point,
I'm not sure what will.
So from a completeness perspective,
I think that's a really good platform
but it's a much more harder platform
because you are dealing with atoms
and you need to actually
build these things
and integrate them into society.
So I think that path takes longer
but it's much more certain.
And then there's a path of the internet
and just training these
compression models effectively
on trying to compress all the internet.
And that might also give
these agents as well.
- Compress the internet but
also interact with the internet.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- So it's not obvious to me.
In fact, I suspect you can reach AGI
without ever entering the physical world,
which is a little bit more concerning
because that results
in it happening faster.
So it just feels like
we're in boiling water.
We won't know as it's happening.
I would like to, I'm not afraid of AGI,
I'm excited about it.
There's always concerns
but I would like to know when it happens.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And have like hints
about when it happens,
like a year from now it will
happen, that kind of thing.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- I just feel like in the digital realm
it just might happen.
- Yeah.
I think all we have available to us
because no one has built AGI again,
so all we have available to us is,
is there enough fertile
ground on the periphery?
I would say, yes.
And we have the progress so far,
which has been very rapid
and there are next steps
that are available.
And so I would say,
yeah, it's quite likely
that we'll be interacting
with digital entities.
- How will you know that
somebody has built AGI?
- I think it's going to be a
slow incremental transition.
It's going to be
product-based and focused.
It's going to be GitHub
Copilot going better.
And then GPTs helping you
write and then these oracles
that you can go to with
mathematical problems.
I think we're on a verge of being able
to ask very complex questions
in chemistry, physics,
math of these oracles and
have them complete solutions.
- So AGI to use primarily
focused on intelligence
so consciousness doesn't enter into it.
- So in my mind, consciousness
is not a special thing
you will figure out and bolt on.
I think it's an emergent
phenomenon of a large enough
and complex enough
generative model sort of.
So if you have a complex
enough world model
that understands the world,
then it also understands
its predicament in the world
as being a language model,
which to me is a form of
consciousness or self-awareness.
- So in order to
understand the world deeply
you probably have to integrate
yourself into the world.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And in order to interact with humans
and other living beings,
consciousness is a very useful tool.
- Yeah.
I think consciousness is
like a modeling insight.
- Modeling insight.
- Yeah.
You have a powerful enough model
of understanding the world
that you actually understand
that you are an entity in it.
- Yeah.
But there's also this,
perhaps just a narrative
we tell ourselves, it feels like something
to experience the world, the
hard problem of consciousness.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- But that could be just a
narrative that we tell ourselves.
- Yeah.
I don't think we'll, yeah,
I think it will emerge.
I think it's going to be
something very boring.
We'll be talking to these digital AIs,
they will claim they're conscious,
they will appear conscious,
they will do all the things
that you would expect of other humans
and it's going to just be a stalemate.
- I think there will be a lot
of actual fascinating ethical questions,
like supreme court level questions
of whether you're allowed
to turn off a conscious AI,
if you're allowed to build a conscious AI,
maybe there would have to
be the same kind of debates
that you have around, sorry
to bring up a political topic,
but abortion, which is the
deeper question with abortion
is what is life?
And the deep question with AI is also,
what is life and what is conscious?
- [Andrej] Right.
- And I think that'll be very fascinating
to bring up, it might become
illegal to build systems
that are capable of such
level of intelligence
that consciousness would emerge
and therefore the capacity
to suffer would emerge.
And a system that says,
no, please don't kill me.
- Well, that's what the
LaMDA chatbot already told
this Google engineer, right?
It was talking about not
wanting to die or so on.
- So that might become illegal to do that.
- [Andrej] Right.
- 'Cause otherwise, you
might have a lot of creatures
that don't want to die and they will-
- [Andrej] You can just spawn
infinity of them on a cluster.
- And then that might lead
to horrible consequences.
'Cause then there might be a lot of people
that secretly love murder
and they'll start practicing
murder on those systems.
I mean there's just, to me
all of this stuff just brings
a beautiful mirror to the human condition
and human nature and we get to explore it.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- And that's what like the
best of the supreme court
of all the different
debates we have about ideas
of what it means to be human,
we get to those deep questions
that we've been asking
throughout human history.
There's always been the
other in human history.
We're the good guys
and that's the bad guys
and we're going to
throughout human history,
let's murder the bad guys.
And the same will probably
happen with robots.
It'll be the other at first.
And then we'll get to ask questions,
that what does it mean to be alive?
What does it mean to be conscious?
- Yep.
And I think there's some
canary in the coal mines
even with what we have today.
And for example, there's these waifus
that you can work with
and some people are trying to,
this company's going to shut down,
but this person really loved their waifu
and is trying to like
port it somewhere else.
And it's not possible.
And I think definitely
people will have feelings
towards these systems
because in some sense
they are like a mirror of humanity
because they are like a
big average of humanity.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- In a way that it's trained.
- But that average, we can actually watch.
It's nice to be able to interact
with the big average of humanity.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And do a search query on it.
- Yeah.
Yeah.
It's very fascinating.
And we can also of course, also shape it.
It's not just a pure average.
We can mess with the training data,
we can mess with the objective,
we can fine-tune them in various ways.
So we have some impact on
what those systems look like.
- If you want to achieve AGI
and you could have a conversation with her
and ask her, talk about anything,
maybe ask her a question.
What kind of stuff would you ask?
- I would've some practical
questions in my mind
like do I or my loved
ones really have to die?
What can we do about that?
- Do you think it will answer clearly
or would it answer poetically?
- I would expect it to give solutions.
I would expect it to be
like, well, I've read
all of these textbooks and
I know all these things
that you've produced and it seems to me
like here are the experiments
that I think it would
be useful to run next.
And here are some gene therapies
that I think would be helpful,
and here are the kinds of
experiments that you should run.
- Okay, let's go with
this thought experiment.
Okay.
Imagine that mortality is actually
a prerequisite for happiness.
So if we become immortal,
we'll actually become deeply unhappy
and the model is able to know that.
So what is it supposed to tell you?
A stupid human about it?
Yes, you can become a mortal
but you'll become deeply unhappy.
If the AGI system is trying
to empathize with you human,
what is it supposed to tell you.
That yes, you don't have to die
but you're really not gonna like it?
Is it gonna be deeply honest?
There's an "Interstellar",
what is it the AI says like
humans want 90% honesty.
So you have to pick how honest
do I want to answer these
practical questions?
- Yeah.
I love AI "Interstellar" by the way.
I think it's like such a
sidekick to the entire story
but at the same time,
it's really interesting.
- It's kind of limited
in certain ways, right?
- Yeah, it's limited and I
think that's totally fine
by the way.
I think it's fine and
plausible to have a limited
and imperfect AGIs.
- Is that a feature almost?
- As an example, it has
a fixed amount of compute
on its physical body.
And it might just be that
even though you can have
a super amazing mega brain,
super-intelligent AI,
you also can have less intelligent AI
that you can deploy in
a power-efficient way.
And then they're not perfect,
they might make mistakes.
- No, I meant more like say
you had infinite compute
and it's still good to
make mistakes sometimes.
In order to integrate yourself.
Like, what is it?
Going back to "Goodwill Hunting",
Robin Williams character
says the human imperfections,
that's good stuff, right?
We don't want perfect,
we want flaws in part to form
connections with each other.
'Cause it feels like
something you can attach
your feelings to, the flaws.
In that same way you
want an AI that's flawed.
I don't know.
I feel like perfection is cold.
- [Andrej] Okay, yeah.
- But that's not AGI.
But see AGI would need
to be intelligent enough
to give answers to humans
that humans don't understand.
And I think perfect is something
humans can't understand
because even science doesn't
give perfect answers.
There's always gaps and
mysteries and I don't know,
I don't know if humans want perfect.
- Yeah, I could imagine
just having a conversation
with this oracle entity
as you'd imagine them
and yeah, maybe it can tell you about,
based on my analysis of human condition,
you might not want this
and here are some of
the things that might-
- But every dumb human will
say, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,
trust me, give me the
truth, I can handle it.
- But that's the beauty,
like people can choose.
- But then, it's the old marshmallow test
with the kids and so on, I
feel like too many people
can't handle the truth,
probably including myself.
Deep truth to the human condition.
I don't know if I can handle it.
What if there's some dark stuff?
What if we are an alien science experiment
and it realizes that.
What if it hacked, I mean?
- I mean, this is "The
Matrix" all over again.
- "The Matrix", I don't know,
what would I talk about?
I don't even, yeah, probably I will go
with the safer scientific
questions at first
that have nothing to do
with my own personal life.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Immortality just like
about physics and so on.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- To build up see where it's at
or maybe see if it has a sense of humor.
That's another question.
Presumably in order to, if
it understands humans deeply,
would it able to generate humor.
- Yeah.
I think that's actually a
wonderful benchmark almost,
like is it able, I think that's
a really good point, basically.
- [Lex] To make you laugh.
- Yeah.
If it's able to be a very
effective standup comedian
that is doing something very
interesting computationally.
I think being funny is extremely hard.
- Yeah, because it's hard in
a way like a touring test,
the original intent of
the touring test is hard
because you have to convince humans
and that's why comedians talk about this,
like this is deeply honest.
'Cause if people can't help but laugh
and if they don't laugh
that means you're not funny,
if they laugh, it's funny.
- Yeah.
And you're showing, you
need a lot of knowledge
to create humor about like you mentioned
human condition and so on.
And then you need to be clever with it.
- You mentioned a few movies,
you Tweeted, "Movies that
I've seen five-plus times
but am ready and willing to keep watching:
'Interstellar', 'Gladiator',
'Contact', 'Goodwill Hunting',
'The Matrix', 'Lord of
the Rings', all three,
'Avatar', 'Fifth Element'," and so on,
it goes on, "'Terminator 2'."
"Mean Girls" I'm not
gonna ask about that one.
- "Mean Girls" is great.
- What are some that jump out to you
in your memory that you love and why?
You mentioned "The Matrix"
as a computer person,
why do you love "The Matrix"?
- There's so many properties
that make it beautiful and interesting.
So there's all these
philosophical questions
but then there's also AGIs,
and there's simulation,
and it's cool, and there's the black.
- [Lex] The look of it, the feel of it.
- Yeah.
The look of it, the feel of it,
the action, the bullet time.
It was just like
innovating in so many ways.
- And then "Goodwill Hunting".
Why do you like that one?
- Yeah, I really like this
tortured genius character
who's grappling with whether or not
he has any responsibility or what to do
with this gift that he was given
or how to think about the whole thing and-
- But there's also a
dance between the genius
and the personal, like what it means
to love another human being.
- Yeah.
There's a lot of themes there.
It's just a beautiful movie.
- And then the fatherly figure,
the mentor and the psychiatrist.
- It really messes with you.
There's some movies that just
like really mess with you
on a deep level.
- Do you relate to that movie at all?
- No.
- It's not your fault Andrej, as I said.
"Lord of the Rings",
that's self-explanatory.
"Terminator 2", which is interesting,
you rewatch that a lot.
Is that better than Terminator one?
You don't like Arnold as he comes back?
- I do like Terminator one as well.
I like "Terminator 2" a little bit more.
But in terms of its surface properties.
- Do you think Skynet
is at all a possibility?
- Yes.
- Like the actual autonomous
weapon system kind of thing?
Do you worry about that stuff?
So AI being used for war?
- I a hundred percent worry about it.
And so the, I mean, some
of these fears of AGIs
and how this will plan
out, I mean these will be
very powerful entities
probably at some point.
And so for a long time,
there are going to be tools
in the hands of humans.
People talk about alignment of AGIs
and how to make, the problem
is even humans are not aligned.
So how this will be used and
what this is gonna look like
is, yeah, it's troubling.
- Do you think it'll happen slowly enough
that we'll be able to
as a human civilization
think through the problems?
- Yes, that's my hope, is
that it happens slowly enough
and in an open enough way
where a lot of people can see
and participate in it.
Just to figure out how to
deal with this transition,
I think, which is gonna be interesting.
- I draw a lot of inspiration
from nuclear weapons
'cause I sure thought it would be fucked
once they develop nuclear weapons.
But it's almost like when the
systems are not so dangerous
they destroy human civilization.
We deploy them and learn the
lessons and then we quickly,
if it's too dangerous we quickly, quickly,
we might still deploy it
but you very quickly learn
not to use them.
And so there'll be like
this balance achieved,
humans are very clever as a species.
It's interesting, we exploit
the resources as much as we can
but we avoid destroying
ourselves it seems like.
- Yeah.
Well, I dunno about that actually.
- I hope it continues.
- I mean I'm definitely like concerned
about nuclear weapons and so on,
not just as a result
of the recent conflict,
even before that.
That's probably like my number
one concern for humanity.
- So if humanity destroys
itself or destroys 90% of people
that would be because of nukes?
- Yeah, I think so.
And it's not even about full destruction,
to me, it's bad enough
if we reset society,
that would be terrible.
That would be really bad.
And I can't believe we're so close to it.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- It's like so crazy to me.
- It feels like we might
be a few Tweets away
from something like that.
- Yep.
Basically, it's extremely unnerving
and has been for me for a long time.
- It seems unstable that world leaders
just having a bad mood can take one step
towards a bad direction
and then it escalates.
- Yeah.
- And because of a
collection of bad moods,
it can escalate without
being able to stop.
- Yeah.
It's a huge amount of power.
And then also with the proliferation
and basically, I don't
actually really see,
I don't actually know what
the good outcomes are here,
so I'm definitely
worried about that a lot.
And then AGI is not currently there
but I think at some point
it will more and more become
something like it.
The danger with AGI even is that
I think it's even slightly worse
in the sense that there
are good outcomes of AGI
and then the bad outcomes
are an epsilon way,
like a tiny run away.
And so I think capitalism
and humanity, and so on
will drive for the positive
ways of using that technology.
But then if bad outcomes
are just like a tiny,
like flip a minus sign away,
that's a really bad position to be in.
- A tiny perturbation of the system
results in the destruction
of the human species.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- It's a weird line to walk.
- Yeah, I think in general
what's really weird
about the dynamics of humanity
and this explosion we talked about
is just the insane coupling
afforded by technology.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And just the instability of
the whole dynamical system.
I think it doesn't look good, honestly.
- Yes.
That explosion could be
destructive or constructive
and the probabilities are
non-zero in both ends of it.
- I'm gonna have to, I
do feel like I have to
try to be optimistic and so on
and I think even in this case
I still am predominantly
optimistic but there's definitely-
- Me too.
Do you think we'll become
a multi-planetary species?
- Probably, yes.
But I don't know if it's dominant feature
of future humanity.
There might be some people
on some planets and so on
but I'm not sure if it's like, yeah,
if it's like a major player
in our culture and so on.
- We still have to solve the drivers
of self-destruction here on earth.
So just having a backup on Mars
is not gonna solve the problem.
- So by the way, I love
the backup on Mars.
I think that's amazing.
We should absolutely do that.
- [Lex] Yes.
- And I'm so thankful.
- Would you go to Mars?
- Personally, no, I do
like earth quite a lot.
- Okay.
I'll go to Mars.
I'll go for you.
I'll Tweet at you from there.
- Maybe eventually I would,
once it's safe enough.
But I don't actually know
if it's on my lifetime scale
unless I can extend it by a lot.
I do think that for example, a
lot of people might disappear
into virtual realities and stuff like that
and I think that could be the major thrust
of the cultural development
of humanity if it survives.
So it might not be, it's
just really hard to work
in physical realm and go out there
and I think ultimately
all your experiences
are in your brain.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And so it's much easier to
disappear into digital realm
and I think people will find
them more compelling, easier,
safer, more interesting.
- So you're a little bit
captivated by virtual reality,
by the possible worlds,
whether it's the metaverse
or some other manifestation of that?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Yeah.
It's really interesting.
I'm interested, just
talking a lot to Carmack,
where's the thing that's
currently preventing that?
- Yeah, I mean to be clear,
I think what's interesting
about the future is it's
not that, I feel like
the variance in the human condition grows.
That's the primary thing that's changing.
It's not as much the
mean of the distribution,
it's like the variance of it.
So there will probably be people on Mars
and there will be people in VR,
and there will people here on earth.
It's just like there will be
so many more ways of being.
And so feel like, I see
it as like a spreading out
of a human experience.
- There's something about the internet
that allows you to discover
those little groups
and you gravitate to,
something about your biology
likes that kind of world
and you find each other.
- Yeah.
And we'll have trans-humanists
and then we'll have the Amish
and everything is just gonna coexist.
- Yeah.
The cool thing about it
'cause I've interacted
with a bunch of internet communities
is they don't know about each other.
Like you can have a very happy existence
just having a very close-knit community
and not knowing about each other.
I mean even you even sense this,
just having traveled to Ukraine,
they don't know so many
things about America.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- When you travel across the world
I think you experience this too.
There are certain cultures that are like,
they have their own thing
going on, they don't.
And so you can see that
happening more and more and more
and more in the future.
We have little communities.
- Yeah.
Yeah.
I think so.
That seems to be how it's going right now.
And I don't see that
trend really reversing.
I think people are
diverse and they're able
to choose their own path in
existence and I celebrate that.
And so-
- Will you spend some,
much time in the metaverse,
in the virtual reality?
Or which community are you,
are you the physicalist,
the physical reality enjoyer
or do you see drawing a lot
of pleasure and fulfillment
in the digital world?
- Yeah, I think, well
currently, the virtual reality
is not that compelling.
- [Lex] Yes.
- I do think it can improve a lot
but I don't really know to what extent.
Maybe there's actually
even more exotic things
you can think about with neural
links or stuff like that.
So currently, I kind of see
myself as mostly a team,
human person, I love nature.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- I love harmony, I love
people, I love humanity.
I love emotions of humanity
and I just want to be
in this solar punk little utopia.
That's my happy place.
- [Lex] Yes.
- My happy place is people I love,
thinking about cool problems,
surrounded by a lush,
beautiful dynamic nature.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And secretly high-tech
in places that count.
- Places that count.
So you use technology to empower that love
for other humans and nature.
- Yeah, I think a technology
used very sparingly.
I don't love when it gets
in the way of humanity
in many ways.
I like just people being humans
in a way, we slightly
evolved and prefer I think
just by default.
- People kept asking me 'cause
they know you love reading.
Are there particular
books that you enjoyed
that had an impact on you for silly
or for profound reasons
that you would recommend?
You mentioned "The Vital Question".
- Many, of course.
I think in biology as an example,
"The Vital Question" is a good one.
Anything by Nick Lane
really, "Life Ascending"
I would say is a bit more
potentially representative
as like a summary of a lot of the things
he's been talking about.
I was very impacted by "The Selfish Gene".
I thought that was a really good book,
it helped me understand
altruism as an example
and where it comes from.
And just realizing that the selection
and the levels of genes
was a huge insight for me at the time
and it cleared up a lot of things for me.
- What do you think about the idea
that ideas are the organisms, the memes?
- Yeah.
Love it.
A hundred percent.
- Are you able to walk around
with that notion for a while?
That there's an
evolutionary kind of process
with ideas as well?
- There absolutely is.
There's memes just like
genes and they compete
and they live in our brains.
It's beautiful.
- Are we silly humans thinking
that we are the organisms?
Is it possible that the primary
organisms are the ideas?
- Yeah, I would say like
the ideas kind of live
in the software of our
civilization in the minds
and so on.
We think as humans that the hardware
is the fundamental thing.
I human is a hardware entity.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- But it could be the software, right?
- Yeah.
Yeah.
I would say there needs
to be some grounding
at some point to a physical reality.
- Yeah, but if we clone an Andrej,
the software is a thing that
makes that thing special.
Right?
- Yeah.
I guess you're right.
- But then cloning might
be exceptionally difficult.
There might be a deep integration
between the software and the hardware
in ways we don't quite yet understand.
- Well, from the altruism point of view,
what makes me special is
more the gang of genes
that are riding in my
chromosomes I suppose.
Right?
They're the replicating unit I suppose-
- No, but that's just the compute,
the thing that makes you special, sure.
Well, the reality is
what makes you special
is your ability to survive
based on the software
that runs on the hardware
that was built by the genes.
So the software is the thing
that makes you survive.
Not the hardware or-
- It's a little bit of both.
It's just like a second layer.
It's a new second layer
that hasn't been there before the brain.
They both coexist.
- But there's also layers of the software.
I mean it's an abstraction
on top of abstractions.
Okay, "Selfish Gene".
- So "Selfish Gene", Nick Lane.
I would say sometimes
books are not sufficient.
I like to reach for textbooks sometimes.
I feel like books are for too much
of a general consumption sometime
and they're too high up in the level
of abstraction and it's not good enough.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- So I like textbooks, I like "The Cell".
I think "The Cell" was pretty cool.
That's why also I like
the writing of Nick Lane
is because he's pretty
willing to step one level down
and he doesn't, yeah,
he's willing to go there
but he's also willing to
be throughout the stack.
So he'll go down to a lot of detail
but then he will come back
up and I think he has a,
yeah, basically, I really appreciate that.
- That's why I love
college, early college,
even high school, just
textbooks on the basics
of computer science, of mathematics,
of biology, of chemistry.
- [Andrej] Yes.
- Those are, they condense
down, it's sufficient in general
that you can understand
both the philosophy
and the details but also
you get homework problems
and you get to play with
it as much as you would
if you were in programming stuff.
- Yeah.
And then I'm also suspicious
of textbooks honestly
because as an example in deep-learning
there's no amazing textbooks
and the field is changing very quickly.
I imagine the same is true
in say synthetic biology
and so on, these books like
"The Cell" are kind of outdated.
They're still high-level,
like what is the actual
real source of truth?
It's people in wet labs
working with cells.
- Yeah.
- Sequencing genomes and,
yeah, actually working with it.
And I don't have that
much exposure to that
or what that looks like.
So I still don't fully, I'm
reading through the cell
and it's kind of
interesting, and I'm learning
but it's still not sufficient I would say
in terms of understanding.
- Well, it's a clean summarization
of the mainstream narrative.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- But you have to learn
that before you break out.
- [Andrej] Yeah,
- Towards the cutting edge.
- Yeah.
But what is the actual process
of working with these cells
and growing them and incubating them
and it's like a massive cooking recipe.
So making sure your cell
slows and proliferate
and then you're sequencing
them, running experiments
and just how that works, I
think is the source of truth of
at the end of the day what's really useful
in terms of creating therapies and so on.
- Yeah.
I wonder what in the
future AI textbooks will be
'cause you know there's
"Artificial Intelligence:
A Modern Approach".
I actually haven't read, if it's come out,
the recent version, there's
been a recent edition.
I also saw there's a science
of deep learning book.
I'm waiting for textbooks
that are worth recommending,
worth reading.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- It's tricky 'cause it's like
papers and code, code, code.
- Honestly, I find papers are quite good.
I especially like the
appendix of any paper as well.
It's like the most detail you can have.
- It doesn't have to be cohesive,
connected to anything else.
You just described me a very specific way
you saw the particular thing.
Yeah.
- Yeah, many times papers can
be actually quite readable,
not always, but sometimes the
introduction and the abstract
is readable even for someone
outside of the field.
This is not always true
and sometimes I think,
unfortunately, scientists
use complex terms
even when it's not necessary.
I think that's harmful.
I think there's no reason for that.
- And papers sometimes are
longer than they need to be
in the parts that don't matter.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- The appendix should be long
but then the papers
itself, look at Einstein,
make it simple.
- Yeah.
But certainly, I've come
across papers I would say,
say like synthetic biology or something
that I thought were quite
readable for the abstract
and the introduction and then
you're reading the rest of it
and you don't fully understand
but you kind of are getting
a gist and I think it's cool.
- You give advice to folks
interested in machine learning
and research but in general life advice
to a young person, high
school, early college
about how to have a career
they can be proud of
or a life they can be proud of?
- Yeah, I think I'm very
hesitant to give general advice.
I think it's really hard.
I've mentioned, some of
the stuff I've mentioned
is fairly general, I think.
Like focus on just the amount
of work you're spending
on like a thing.
Compare yourself only to
yourself, not to others.
- [Lex] That's good.
- [Andrej] I think those
are fairly general.
- How do you pick the thing?
- You just have like a
deep interest in something
or try to find the argmax over the things
that you're interested in.
- Argmax at that moment and stick with it.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- How do you not get distracted
and switch to another thing?
- You can if you like.
- Well, if you do an argmax
repeatedly every week,
every month.
- [Andrej] Yeah, it doesn't converge.
- It's a problem.
- Yeah.
You can like low-pass filter yourself
in terms of what has
consistently been true for you.
But yeah, I definitely
see how it can be hard
but I would say you're
going to work the hardest
on the thing that you care about the most.
So low pass filter yourself
and really introspect
in your past, what are the
things that gave you energy
and what are the things that
took energy away from you?
Concrete examples.
And usually, from those concrete examples,
sometimes patterns can merge.
I like it when things look like this
when I'm in these positions.
- So that's not necessarily the field
but the kind of stuff you're
doing in a particular field.
So for you, it seems
like you were energized
by implementing stuff,
building actual things.
- Yeah, being low-level, learning
and then also communicating
so that others can go through
the same realizations
and shortening that gap.
Because I usually have
to do way too much work
to understand a thing
and then I'm like, okay,
this is actually like,
okay, I think I get it
and like why was it so much work?
It should have been much less work.
And that gives me a lot of frustration
and that's why I sometimes go teach.
- So aside from the
teaching you're doing now,
putting out videos, aside from
a potential "Godfather II"
would the AGI at Tesla and beyond,
what does the future for
Andrej Karpathy hold,
have you figured that out yet or no?
I mean as you see through the fog of war
that is all of our future, do
you start seeing silhouettes
of what that possible
future could look like?
- The consistent thing I've
been always interested in,
for me at least is Ai.
And that's probably what I'm
spending the rest of my life on
because I just care about it a lot.
And I actually care about
many other problems as well.
Like say aging, which I
basically view as disease
and I care about that as well.
But I don't think it's a good idea
to go after it, specifically.
I don't actually think
that humans will be able to
come up with the answer.
I think the correct thing to
do is to ignore those problems
and you solve AI and then use
that to solve everything else.
And I think there's a
chance that this will work.
I think it's a very high chance
and that's the way I'm betting at least.
- So when you think about AI,
are you interested in all
kinds of applications?
- [Andrej] Yes.
- All kinds of domains.
And any domain you focus on will allow you
to get insights to the big problem of AGI?
- Yeah, for me it's the
ultimate meta-problem.
I don't wanna work on
any one specific problem,
there's too many problems.
So how can you work on all
problems simultaneously?
You solve the meta-problem,
which to me is just intelligence
and how do you automate it?
- Is there cool small
projects like arxiv-sanity
and so on that you're thinking about
that ML world can anticipate.
- There's always some fun side projects.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- arxiv-sanity is one, yeah, basically,
there's way too many archive papers,
how can I organize it and
recommend papers and so on.
I transcribed all of your podcasts.
- What did you learn from that experience,
from transcribing the process of like
you consuming audiobooks
and podcasts and so on?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And here's a process that achieves
closer to human-level
performance on annotation.
- Yeah, well, I definitely was surprised
that transcription with OpenAI Whisper
was working so well compared
to what I'm familiar with,
from Siri and a few other systems
I guess, it works so well.
And that's what gave me
some energy to try it out.
And I thought it could be
fun to run on podcasts.
It's not obvious to me why
Whisper is so much better
compared to anything
else because I feel like
there should be a lot of incentive
for a lot of companies to
produce transcription systems
and that they've done so over a long time.
Whisper is not a super exotic
model, it's a transformer,
it takes mel spectrograms
and it just outputs tokens of text.
It's not crazy.
The model and everything has
been around for a long time.
I'm not actually a hundred
percent sure why this came about.
- Yeah, it's not obvious to me either.
It makes me feel like I'm
missing something for the middle.
- [Andrej] I'm missing something.
- Yeah, because there is a
huge, even Google and so on,
YouTube transcription.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- Yeah.
It's unclear.
But some of it is also
integrating into a bigger system.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- So the user interface, how it's deployed
and all that kind of stuff.
Maybe running it as an
independent thing is much easier,
like an order of magnitude easier
than deploying it to a
large integrated system
like YouTube transcription, or anything,
like meetings, like
Zoom has transcription,
that's kind of crappy.
But creating interface where it detects
the different individual speakers,
it's able to display
it in compelling ways,
run it real-time, all that kind of stuff.
Maybe that's difficult.
That's the only explanation I have
because I'm currently paying quite a bit
for human transcription, human caption.
- [Andrej] Right.
- Annotation.
And like it seems like
there's a huge incentive
to automate that.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- It's very confusing.
- And I think, I mean,
I dunno if you looked at
some of the Whisper transcripts,
but they're quite good.
- They're good.
And especially in tricky cases.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- I've seen Whisper's
performance on super tricky cases
and it does incredibly well.
So I don't know, a
podcast is pretty simple.
It's like high-quality audio
and you're speaking
usually pretty clearly.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And so I don't know,
I don't know what
OpenAIs plans are either.
- But yeah, there's always
fun projects basically.
And stable diffusion also
is opening up a huge amount
of experimentation I would
say in the visual realm
and generating images, and
videos, and movies ultimately.
- [Lex] Yeah, videos now.
- And so that's going to be pretty crazy.
That's going to almost certainly work
and it's going to be really interesting
when the cost of content creation
is going to fall to zero.
You used to need a painter for
a few months to paint a thing
and now it's going to
be speak to your phone
to get your video.
- So if Hollywood will start
using that to generate scenes
which completely opens up.
Yeah.
So you can make a movie
like "Avatar" eventually
for under a million dollars.
- Much less maybe just
by talking to your phone.
I mean, I know it sounds kind of crazy.
- And then there'd be
some voting mechanism,
would there be a show on Netflix
that's generated completely automatedly?
Semi-automatedly?
- Yeah, potentially.
Yeah.
And what does it look like also
when you can just generate it on demand
and there's infinity of it?
- Yeah.
Oh, man.
All the synthetic content.
I mean it's humbling because
we treat ourselves as special
for being able to generate art,
and ideas, and all that kind of stuff.
If that can be done in
an automated way by Ai.
- Yeah.
I think it's fascinating to me how these,
the predictions of AI and
what it's going to look like
and what it's going to be capable of
are completely inverted and wrong.
And sci-fi of fifties and sixties,
were just totally not right.
They imagine AI is like super calculating,
theorem provers, and we're getting things
that can talk to you about emotions.
They can do art, it's just weird.
- Are you excited about that future?
just AI's, like hybrid
systems, heterogeneous systems
of humans and AIs talking about emotions,
Netflix and chill with an AI system.
Or the Netflix thing you
watch is also generated by AI?
- I think it's going to
be interesting for sure
and I think I'm cautiously optimistic
but it's not obvious.
- Well, the sad thing is
your brain and mine developed
in a time before Twitter,
before the internet.
So I wonder people that
are born inside of it
might have a different experience.
Like I, and maybe you will still resist it
and the people born now will not.
- Well, I do feel like humans
are extremely malleable.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And you're probably right.
- What is the meaning of life, Andrej?
We talked about the universe
having a conversation with us humans
or with the systems we
create to try to answer.
For the creator of the
universe to notice us,
we're trying to create systems
that are loud enough to answer back.
- I dunno if that's the meaning of life.
That's like meaning of
life for some people.
The first level answer I would say
is anyone can choose
their own meaning of life
because we are a conscious entity
and it's beautiful, number one.
But I do think that a
deeper meaning of life
if someone is interested
is along the lines of like,
what the hell is all this?
And like why?
And if you look into fundamental physics
and the quantum field theory
and the standard model,
they're very complicated.
And there's this 19 free
parameters of our universe
and what's going on with all
this stuff and why is it here?
And can I hack it?
Can I work with it?
Is there a message for me?
Am I supposed to create a message?
And so I think there's some
fundamental answers there
but I think there's actually even like,
you can't actually
really make dent in those
without more time.
And so to me also there's
a big question around
just getting more time, honestly.
Yeah.
That's what I think about
quite a bit as well.
- So kind of the ultimate,
or at least first way to
sneak up to the why question
is to try to escape the
system, the universe?
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- And then for that you backtrack
and say, okay, for that, that's
gonna take a very long time.
So the why question boils down
from an engineering perspective
to how do we extend?
- Yeah.
I think that's the question number one,
practically speaking, because
you're not gonna calculate
the answer to the deeper
questions in the time you have.
- And that could be
extending your own lifetime
or extending just the lifetime
of human civilization.
- Of whoever wants to, many
people might not want that.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- But I think people who do want that,
I think it's probably possible,
and I don't know that
people fully realize this.
I feel like people think of
death as an inevitability
but at the end of the day,
this is a physical system.
Some things go wrong.
It makes sense why
things like this happen,
evolutionarily speaking,
and there's most certainly
interventions that mitigate it.
- That would be interesting if
death is eventually looked at
as a fascinating thing that
used to happen to humans.
- I don't think it's unlikely.
I think it's likely.
- And it's up to our
imagination to try to predict
what the world without death looks like.
- [Andrej] Yeah.
- It's hard to, I think the
values will completely change.
- Could be, I don't really
buy all these ideas that,
oh, without death, there's no
meaning, there's nothingness.
I don't intuitively buy
all those arguments.
I think there's plenty of meaning,
plenty of things to learn.
They're interesting, exciting.
I want to know, I want to calculate,
I want to improve the
condition of all the humans
and organisms that are alive.
- Yeah.
The way we find meaning might change.
There is a lot of humans,
probably including myself,
that finds meaning in
the finiteness of things,
but that doesn't mean that's
the only source of meaning.
- Yeah.
I do think many people will go with that,
which I think is great.
I love the idea that people
can just choose their own adventure.
You are born as a conscious,
free entity by default.
I'd like to think.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And you have your
unalienable rights for life.
- In the pursuit of happiness?
I don't know if you that, and the nature,
the landscape of happiness.
- And you can choose your
own adventure, mostly.
And that's not fully true but.
- I'm still am pretty sure I'm an NPC,
but an NPC can't know it's an NPC.
There could be different degrees
and levels of consciousness.
I don't think there's a more
beautiful way to end it.
Andrej, you're an incredible person.
I'm really honored you would talk with me,
everything you've done for
the machine learning world,
for the AI world to just inspire people,
to educate millions of people.
It's been great and I can't
wait to see what you do next.
It's been an honor, man.
Thank you so much for talking today.
- Awesome.
Thank you.
Thanks for listening to this conversation
with Andrej Karpathy,
to support this podcast
please check out our
sponsors in the description.
And now, let me leave you
some words from Samuel Karlin,
"The purpose of models
is not to fit the data
but to sharpen the questions."
Thanks for listening and
hope to see you next time.

So we talked three years ago. I'm
curious in your view, what has been the
biggest update of the last three years?
What has been the biggest difference
between what it felt like last three
years versus now?
>> Yeah, I would say actually the
underlying technology like the
exponential of the technology has has
gone broadly speaking I would say about
about as I expected it to go. I mean
there's like plus or minus you know a
couple there's plus or minus a year or
two here. There's plus or minus a year
or two there. I don't know that I would
have predicted the specific direction of
code. Um but but actually when I look at
the exponential it it is roughly what I
expected in terms of the march of the
models from like you know smart high
school student to smart college student
to like you know beginning to do PhD and
professional stuff and in the case of
code reaching beyond that. So you know
the frontier is a little bit uneven.
It's roughly what I expected. I will
tell you though what the most surprising
thing has been. The most surprising
thing has been the lack of public
recognition of how close we are to the
end of the exponential. To me, it is
absolutely wild that, you know, you have
people, you know, within the bubble and
outside the bubble, you know, but but
you have people talking about these
these, you know, just the same tired old
hot button political issues and like,
you know, around us. We're like near the
end of the exponential. I I want to
understand what that exponential looks
like right now because the first
question I asked you when we recorded
three years ago was, you know, what's up
with scaling? How why does it work? Um I
have a similar question now but I feel
like it's a more complicated question
because at least from the public's point
of view.
>> Yes.
>> Three years ago there were these you
know well-known public trends where
across many orders of magnitude of
compute you could see how the loss
improves and now we have RL scaling and
there's no publicly known scaling law
for it. It's not even clear what exactly
the story is of is this supposed to be
teaching the model skills is supposed to
be teaching metalarning. Um what is the
scaling hypothesis at this point?
>> Yeah. So, so I have actually the same
hypothesis that I had even all the way
back in 2017. So, in 2017, I think I
talked about it last time, but I wrote a
doc called the the big blob of compute
hypothesis. And and and you know, it it
wasn't about the scaling of language
models in particular. When I when I
wrote it, GPT1 had had just come out,
right? So, that was you know, one among
many things, right? There was back in
those days there was robotics. People
tried to work on reasoning as a separate
thing from language models. there was
scaling of the kind of RL that happened
that you know kind of happened in Alph
Go and uh you know that that happened at
Dota at OpenAI and um you know people
remember Starcraft at Deep Mind you know
the Alpha Star um so uh it was written
as a more general document and and the
specific thing I said was the following
that and you know it's it's very you
know Rich Sutton put out the bitter
lesson a couple years later um uh but
you know the the hypothesis is is
basically the same so so what it says is
all the cleverness, all the techniques,
all all the kind of we need a new method
to to do something like that doesn't
matter very much. There are only a few
things that matter and I think I listed
seven of them. One is like how much raw
compute you have. The other is the
quantity of data that you have. Then the
third is kind of the quality and
distribution of data, right? It needs to
be a broad broad distribution of data.
The fourth is I think how long you train
for. Um the fifth is you need an
objective function that can scale to the
moon. So the pre-training objective
function is one such objective function
right another objective function is you
know the the kind of RL objective
function that says like you have a goal
you're going to go out and reach the
goal within that of course there's
objective rewards like you know like you
see in math and coding and there's more
subjective rewards like you see in RL
from human feedback are kind of higher
order higher order versions of that and
and then the sixth and seventh were
things around kind of like normaliz
ation or conditioning like you know just
getting the numerical stability so that
kind of the big blob of compute flows in
this laminer way instead of instead of
running into problems. So that was the
hypothesis and it's a hypothesis I still
hold. I I don't think I've seen very
much that is not in line with that
hypothesis. And so the pre-trained
scaling laws were one example of what of
of of kind of what we see there. And
indeed those have continued going like
you know uh you know I think I think now
it's been it's been widely reported like
you know we feel good about pre-training
like pre-training is continuing to give
us gains. What has changed is that now
we're also seeing the same thing for RL
right so we're seeing a pre-training
phase and then we're seeing like an RL
phase on top of that. Um and with RL
it's it's actually just the same like
you know even even other companies have
have published um uh um like um you know
in some of their in some of their
releases have published things that say
look you know we train the model on math
contests you know aime or or the kind of
other things and you know how well how
well the model does is log linear and
how long we've trained it and we see
that as well and it's not just math
contest it's a wide variety of RL tasks.
And so we're seeing the same scaling in
RL that we saw for pre-training. Um you
mentioned Richard Sutton and the bitter
lesson. Yeah,
>> I interviewed him last year and he is
actually very non LLM pill. And if I'm
if I I don't know if this is his
perspective, but one way to paraphrase
this objection is something like look
something which possesses the true core
of human learning would not require all
these billions of dollars of data and
compute and these bespoke environments
to learn how to use Excel or how does an
you know how to how to use PowerPoint,
how to navigate a web browser. And the
fact that we have to build in these
skills using these RL environments hints
that we're actually lacking this core
human learning algorithm. Uh and so
we're scaling the wrong thing. And so
yeah, that does raise a question. Why
are we doing all this RL scaling if we
do think there's something that's going
to be humanlike in its ability to learn
on the fly?
>> Yeah. Yeah. So I think I think this kind
of puts together several things that
should be kind of thought of thought of
differently.
>> Yeah. I think there is a genuine puzzle
here, but it it may not matter. Um, in
fact, I would guess it probably it
probably doesn't matter. So, let's take
the RL out of it for a second because I
actually think RL and it's a red herring
to say that RL is any different from
pre-training in this matter. Um, so if
we if we look at pre-training scaling,
um, it it was very interesting back in,
you know, 2017 when Alec Radford was
doing GPT1. If you look at the models
before GPT1, they were trained on these
data sets that didn't represent a wide,
you know, distribution of text, right?
You had like, you know, these very
standard, you know, kind of language
modeling benchmarks and GBT1 itself was
trained on a bunch of, I think it was
fanfiction actually. Um, but you know,
it was it was like literary, you know,
it's like literary text, which is a very
small fraction of the text that you get.
And what we found with that, you know,
and in those days it was like a billion
words or something. So small data sets
and represented a pretty narrow
distribution, right? Like a narrow
distribution of kind of what what you
can see what you can see in the world.
And it didn't generalize well. If you
did better on um you know the the you
know I forget what but some some kind of
fanfiction corpus um it wouldn't
generalize that well to kind of the
other hat. you know, we had all these
measures of like, you know, how well
does how well does a model do at
predicting all of these other kinds of
texts. You really didn't see the
generalization. It was only when you
trained over all the tasks on the you,
you know, the internet when you when you
kind of did a general internet scrape,
right, from something like, you know,
common crawl or scraping links on
Reddit, which is what we did for GPT2.
It's only when you do that that you kind
of started to get generalization. Um,
and I think we're seeing the same thing
on RL that we're starting with first
very simple RL tasks like training on
math competitions. Then we're kind of
moving to, you know, kind of broader
broader training that involves things
like code as a task. And now we're
moving to do kind of many many other
tasks. And then I think we're going to
increasingly get generalization. So that
that kind of takes out the RL versus the
pre-training side of it. But I think
there is a puzzle here either way which
is that on pre-training when we train
the model on pre-training you know we we
use like trillions of tokens right and
and humans don't see trillions of words
so there is an actual sample efficiency
difference here there is actually
something different that's that's
happening here which is that the models
start from scratch and you know they
have to get much more much more training
but we also see that once they're
trained if we give them a long context
length. The only thing blocking a long
context length is like inference. But if
we give them like a context length of a
million, they're very good at learning
and adapting within that context length.
And and so I don't know the full answer
to this, but but I think there's
something going on that pre-training
it's it's not like the process of humans
learning. It's somewhere between the
process of humans learning and the
process of human evolution. It's like
it's somewhere between like we get many
of our priors from evolution. Our brain
isn't just a blank slate, right? Whole
books have been written about. I think
the language models, they're much more
blank slates. They literally start as
like random weights. Whereas the human
brain starts with all these regions.
It's connected to all these inputs and
outputs. Um and and so maybe we should
think of pre-training and for that
matter RL as well as as being something
that exists in the middle space between
human evolution and you know kind of
human on on the spot learning and as the
in context learning that the models do
as as something between long-term human
learning and short-term human learning.
So, you know, there there's this
hierarchy of like there's evolution,
there's long-term learning, there's
short-term learning, and there's just
human reaction. And the LOM phases exist
along this spectrum, but not necessarily
exactly at the same points that there's
no analog to some of the human modes of
learning. The LOMs are kind of falling
between the points. Does that make
sense?
>> Um, yes. Although some things are still
a bit confusing. For example, if the
analogy is that this is like evolution,
so it's fine that it's not that sample
efficient, then like well, if we're
going to get the kind of super sample
efficient agent from in context
learning, why are we bothering to build
in, you know, there's RL environment
companies which are it seems like what
they're doing is they're teaching it how
to use this API, how to use Slack, how
to use whatever. It's confusing to me
why there's so much emphasis on that if
the kind of agent that can just learn on
the fly is emerging or is going to soon
emerge or has already emerged.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So I I I mean I can't speak
for the emphasis of anyone else. I can I
can only talk about how we how we think
about it. I think the way we think about
it is the goal is not to teach the model
every possible skill within RL just as
we don't do that within pre-training.
Right? Within pre-training we're not
trying to expose the model to you know
every every possible uh you know way
that words could be put together. Right?
you know, we're it's it's rather that
the model trains on a lot of things and
then and then it reaches generalization
across pre-training, right? That was
that was the transition from GPT1 to
GPT2 that I saw up close which is like
you know the the model reaches a point
you know I I I I like had these moments
where I was like oh yeah you just give
the model like you just give the model a
list of numbers that's like you know um
you know this is the cost of the house
this is the square feet of the house and
the model completes the pattern and does
linear regression like not great but it
does it but it's never seen that exact
thing before and and so to you know to
to the extent that we are building these
RL environments the the goal is is very
similar to what is be you know to what
was done five or 10 years ago with
pre-training with we're trying to get a
we're trying to get a whole bunch of
data not because we want to cover a
specific document or a specific skill
but because we want to generalize. I
mean I I think the framework you're
laying down obviously makes sense like
we're making progress towards AGI. I
think the crux is something like nobody
at this point disagrees that we're going
to achieve AGI in this century. And the
crux is you say we're hitting the end of
the exponential um and somebody else
looks at this and says, "Oh yeah, we
we're making progress. We've been making
progress since 2012 and then 2035 we'll
have a humanlike agent." And so I want
to understand what it is that you're
seeing which makes you think um yeah
obviously we're seeing the kinds of
things that evolution did or that human
within the human lifetime learning is
like in these models and why think that
it's one year away and not 10 years
away.
>> I I I actually think of it as like two
there's kind of two cases to be made
here or like two two claims you could
make. One of which is like stronger and
the other of which is weaker. So, I
think starting starting with the weaker
claim, you know, when when I first saw
the scaling back in like, you know,
2019,
um, you know, I wasn't sure. You know,
this was the whole this was kind of a
50/50 thing, right? I thought I saw
something that was, you know, and and my
claim was this is much more likely than
anyone thinks it is. Like, this is wild.
No one else would even consider this.
Maybe there's a 50% chance this happens.
um on the basic hypothesis of you know
as you put it within 10 years we'll get
to you know you know what I call kind of
country of geniuses in a data center I'm
at like 90% on that um and it's hard to
go much higher than 90% cuz the world is
so unpredictable um maybe the
irreducible uncertainty would be if we
were at 95% where you get to things like
I don't know may maybe multi you know
multiple companies have you know kind of
internal turmoil and nothing happens and
then Taiwan gets invaded and like all
the all the fabs get blown up by
missiles and and you know and then now
you scenario you know just you could
construct a scenario where there's like
a 5% chance that it it or you know you
can construct a 5% world where like
things things get delayed for for for
for for 10 years that's maybe 5%.
There's another 5% which is that I'm
very confident on tasks that can be
verified. So I think I think with coding
I'm just except for that irreducible
uncertainty there's just there's I mean
I think we'll be there in one or two
years there's no way we will not be
there there in 10 years in terms of
being able to do it end to end coding.
My one little bit the one little bit of
of fundamental uncertainty even on long
time scales is this thing about tasks
that aren't verifiable like planning a
mission to Mars like uh you know doing
some fundamental scientific discovery
like like crisper like you know writing
a writing a novel hard to hard to verify
those tasks. I am almost certain that
we have a reliable path to get there.
But like if there was a little bit
uncertainty, it's there. So, so, so, so,
so on the 10 years, I'm like, you know,
90% which is about as certain as you can
be. Like I think it's I think it's crazy
to say that this won't happen by by by
2035. Like in some sane world, it would
be outside the mainstream. But but the
emphasis on verification hints to me as
a lack of a lack of uh belief that these
models are generalized. If you think
about humans,
>> we are good at things that both which we
get verifiable reward and things which
we don't. You're like you have no no
this is this is why I'm almost sure we
already see substantial generalization
from things that that verify to things
that don't ver. We're already seeing
that. But but it seems like you were
emphasizing this as a spectrum which
will
uh split apart which domains we see more
progress and I'm like but that's it
doesn't seem like how humans get there.
>> The world in which we don't make it or
or or the world in which we don't get
there is the world in which we do we do
all the things that are that are
verifiable and then they like you know
many of them generalize but but we kind
of don't get fully there. We don't we
don't we don't fully you know we don't
fully color in this side of the box.
It's it's it's not a it's not a binary
thing. But but it also seems to me even
if even if in the world where
generalization is weak when you only say
baref domains it's not clear to me in
such a world you could automate software
engineering because software like in
some sense you are quote unquote a
software engineer but part of being a
software engineer for you involves
writing these like long memos about your
grand vision about different things and
so I don't think that's part of the job
of sui that's part that's part of the
job of the company but I do think
involves like design documents and other
things like that um which by the way the
models are not bad they're already
pretty good at writing comments and
start and so with with again I'm making
like much weaker claims here than I
believe to like you know to to to to
kind of set up a you know to to
distinguish between two things like
we're we're already almost there for
software engineering and we are already
almost there by by what metric there's
one metric which is like how many lines
of code are written by AI and if you use
if you consider other productivity
improvements in the course of the
history of software engineering
compilers write all the lines of
software and but we there's a difference
between how many lines are written and
how big the productivity improvement Oh
yeah. And um and then like we're almost
there, meaning like the how big is the
productivity improvement, not just how
many lines are written.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So so I actually um I
actually I actually agree with you on
this. So I I've made this series of
predictions on um code and software
engineering and and and I think people
have repeatedly kind of misunderstood
them. So So let me let me let me let me
let me lay out the spectrum, right? Like
I think it was like you know like you
know eight eight or nine months ago or
something I said you know the AI model
will be writing 90 90% of the lines of
code in like you know 3 to 6 months
which which happened at least at some
places right happened happened at
entropic happened with many people
downstream using our models but but
that's actually a very weak criterion
right people thought I was saying like
we won't need 90% of the software
engineers those things are worlds apart
right like I would put the spectrum term
as 90% of code is written by the model,
100% of code is written by the model and
that's a big difference in productivity.
Um 90% of the end toend SWE tasks,
right? Including things like compiling,
including things like setting up
clusters and environments, testing
features, writing memos, 90% of the SU
tasks are written by the models. 100% of
today's suite tasks are are are written
by the models. And and even when when
when that happen doesn't mean software
engineers are out of a job like there's
like new higher level things they can do
where they can they can manage and then
there's a further down the spectrum like
you know there's 90% less demand for
SWES which I think will happen but like
this is this this is a spectrum and you
know I wrote about it in in the
adolescence of technology where I went
through this kind of spectrum with
farming um uh uh and so I I actually
totally agree with you on that. It's
just these are very different benchmarks
from each other but we're proceeding
through them super fast. It seems like
in part of your vision it's like going
from 90 to 100 um first it's going to
happen fast and two that somehow that
leads to huge productivity improvements.
Um whereas when I noticed even in green
field projects that people start with
cloud code or something people report
starting a lot of projects and I'm like
do we see in the world out there a
renaissance of software all these new
features that wouldn't exist otherwise
and at least so far it doesn't seem like
we see that and so that does make me
wonder even if even if like I never had
to intervene on cloud code um there is
this thing of like there's just the
world is complicated jobs are
complicated and
closing the loop on self-contained
systems whether just writing software or
something how much sort of how much
broader gains we would see just from
that. And so maybe that makes us this
should dilute our estimation of the
country of geniuses.
>> I well well I actually I I like I like
simultaneously
I simultaneously agree with you agree
that it's a reason why these things
don't happen instantly but at the same
time I think the the the effect is going
to be very fast. So like I don't know
you could have these two poles right one
is like um you know AI is like you know
it's not going to make progress it's
slow like it's going to take you know
kind of forever to diffuse within the
economy right economic diffusion has
become one of these buzzwords that's
like a a reason why we're not going to
make AI progress or why AI progress
doesn't matter and and you know the
other axis is like we'll get recursive
self-improvement you know the whole
thing you know can't you just draw an
exponential line on the on the curve you
know it's it's we're going to have you
know Dyson spheres around the sun in
like you know
you know so many nanconds after you know
after after we get recursive I mean I'm
completely caricaturing the view here
but like you know there there there are
these two extremes but what we've seen
from from the beginning you know at
least if you look within anthropic
there's this bizarre 10x per year growth
in revenue that we've seen right so you
know in 2023 it was like 0 to 100
million 2024 it was 100 million to a
billion. 2025 it was a billion to like 9
or 10 billion. And then
>> you guys should have just bought like a
billion dollars with your own product so
you could just like have a clean 10V
[laughter] and and the first month of
this year like that that exponential is
you would think it would slow down but
it would like you know we added another
few billion to like you know to to to we
added another few billion to revenue in
January and and so you know obviously
that curve can't go on forever right you
know the GDP is only so large I don't
you know I I would even guess that it
bends that it bends bends somewhat this
here. But like that is like a fast
curve, right? That's like a that's like
a really fast curve. And I would bet it
stays pretty fast even as the scale goes
to the entire economy. So like I I think
we should be thinking about this middle
world where things are like extremely
fast but not instant where they take
time because of economic diffusion
because of the need to close the loop
because you know it's like this fiddly
oh man I have to do change management
within my enterprise you know I have to
like you know uh uh you know I I I I
like I set this up but but you know I
have to change the security permissions
on this in order to make it actually
work or you know, I had this like old
piece of software that, you know, that
like, you know, checks the model before
it's compiled and and and like released
and I have to rewrite it. And yes, the
model can do that, but I have to tell
the model to do that and it has to it
has to take time to do that. and and and
so I think everything we've seen so far
is is compatible with the idea that
there's one fast exponential that's the
the capability of the model and then
there's another fast exponential that's
downstream of that which is the
diffusion of the model into the economy
not instant
not slow much faster than any previous
technology but it has its limits and and
and and this is what we you know when I
when I look inside anthropic when I look
at our customers fast adoption but not
infinitely fast.
>> Um can I try a hot take on you?
>> Yeah.
>> I feel like diffusion is cope that
people use to say when it's like if the
model isn't able to do something they're
like oh but the diffus it's like a
diffusion issue. But then you should use
the comparison to humans. You would
think that the inherent advantages that
AIs have would make diffusion a much
easier problem for new AIs getting
onboarded than new humans getting
onboarded. So an AI can read your entire
Slack and your drive in minutes. They
can share all the knowledge that the
other copy other copies of the same
instance have. You don't have this
adverse selection problem when you're
hiring AI because you can just hire
copies of a vetted AI model. Um hiring a
human is like so much more hassle. And
people hire humans all the time, right?
We pay humans upwards of $50 trillion in
wages because they're useful. Uh even
though it's like in principle it would
be much easier to integrate AI into the
economy than it is to hire humans. I
think like the diffusion I feel like
doesn't really I I think diffusion is
very real and and and and and doesn't
have to you know doesn't exclusively
have to do with limitation limitation
limitations on the AI models like again
there are people who use diffusion to to
you know as kind of a buzzword to say
this isn't a big deal. I'm not talking
about that. I'm not talking about, you
know, AI will diffuse at the speed that
previous I think AI will diffuse much
faster than previous technologies have,
but but not infinitely fast. So, I'll
I'll just give an example of this,
right? Like there's like claude code.
Like claude code is extremely easy to
set up. Um, you know, if you're a
developer, you can kind of just start
using cla code. There is no reason why a
developer at a large enterprise should
not be adopting claude code as quickly
as you know individual developer
developer at a startup and we do
everything we can to promote it right we
sell uh we sell cla code to enterprises
and big enterprises like you know big
big financial companies big
pharmaceutical companies all of them
they're adopting claude code much faster
than enterprises typically adopt new
technology, right? But but again, it
like it it it it takes time like any
given feature or any given product like
claude code or like co-work will get
adopted by the you know the individual
developers who are on Twitter all the
time by the like series A startups
many months faster than than you know
than they will get adopted by like you
know a like large enterprise that does
food sales. Um there are a number of
factors like you have to go through
legal, you have to provision it for
everyone. It has to you know like it has
to pass security and compliance. The
leaders of the company who are further
away from the AI revolution you know are
are forwardlooking but they have to say
oh it makes sense for us to spend 50
million. This is what this claud code
thing is. This is why it helps our
company. This is why it makes us more
productive. And then they have to
explain to the people two levels below.
and they have to say, "Okay, we have
3,000 developers. Like, here's how we're
going to roll it out to our developers."
And we have conversations like this
every day. Like, you know, we are doing
everything we can to make Anthropics
revenue grow 20 or 30x a year instead of
10x a year. Um, you know, and and and
again, you know, many enterprises are
just saying this is so productive like,
you know, we're going to take shortcuts
in our usual procurement process, right?
they're moving much faster than you know
when we tried to sell them just the
ordinary API which many of them use but
quad code is a more compelling product
um but it's not an infinitely compelling
product and I don't think even AGI or
powerful AI or country of geniuses in
the data center will be an infinitely
compelling product it will be a
compelling product enough maybe to get
three or five or 10x a year growth even
when you're in the hundreds of billions
of dollars which is extremely hard to do
and has never been done in history
before but not infinitely fast I I buy
that it would be a slight slowdown and
maybe this is not your claim but
sometimes people talk about this like oh
the capabilities are there but because
of diffusion um otherwise like we're
basically at AGI and then
>> I I I don't believe we're basically at
AGI.
>> I think if you had the country of
geniuses in a data center if your
company didn't
geniuses in a data center we would know
it. We would know it if you had the
country of geniuses in a data center
like everyone in this room would know
it. Everyone in Washington would know
it. like you know people in rural rural
parts might not know it but but but like
we would know it we don't have that now
that that's very clear as Dario was
ending at to get generalization you need
to train across a wide variety of
realistic tasks and environments [music]
for example with a sales agent the
hardest part isn't teaching it to mash
buttons in a specific database in
Salesforce it's training the agent's
judgment across ambiguous situations how
do you sort through a database with
thousands of leads to figure out which
ones are
How do you actually reach out? What do
you do when you get ghosted? When an AI
lab wanted to train a sales agent,
Labelbox brought in dozens of Fortune
500 sales people to build a bunch of
different RL environments. They created
thousands of scenarios where the sales
agent had to engage with the potential
customer, which was roleplayed by a
second AI. Limblebox made sure that this
customer AI had a few different
personas. Because when you cold call,
you have no idea who's going to be on
the other end. You need to be able to
deal with a whole range of
possibilities. Limblebox's sales experts
monitored these conversations turn by
[music] turn, tweaking the role
playinging agent to ensure it did the
kinds of things an actual customer would
do. Label Box could iterate faster than
anybody else in the industry. This is
super important because RL is an
empirical science. [music] It's not a
solve problem. Labelbox has a bunch of
tools for monitoring agent performance
in real time. This lets their experts
keep coming up with tasks so that the
model stays in the right distribution of
difficulty and [music] gets the optimal
reward signal during training. Label box
can do this sort of thing in almost
every domain. They've got headphone
managers, radiologists, even airline
pilots. So, whatever you're working on,
Labelbox [music]
can help. Learn more at
labelbox.com/vorcash.
Coming back to concrete predictions
because I think because there's so many
different things to dis ambiguate, it
can be easy to talk past each other when
we're talking about capabilities. So,
for example, when I interviewed 3 years
ago, I asked her a prediction about what
should we expect 3 years from now. I
think you were right. So you said we
should expect systems which if you talk
to them for the course of an hour it's
hard to tell them apart from a generally
well educated human. Yes.
>> I think you were right about that and I
think spiritually I feel unsatisfied
because my internal expectation was was
that such a system could automate large
parts of white collar work and so it
might be more productive to talk about
the actual end capabilities. You want
such a system.
>> So so I will I will I will basically
tell you what what you know where where
I think we are. So but let me let me ask
it in a very specific question so that
we can figure out exactly what kinds of
capabilities we should expect soon. So
maybe I'll ask about it in the context
of a job I understand well not because
it's the most relevant job but um just
because I can evaluate the claims about
it. Um take video editors right I have
video editors and part of their invol
job involves learning about our
audience's preferences learning about my
preferences and tastes and the different
trade-offs we have and how just over the
course of many months building up this
understanding of context. And so the
skill and ability they have six months
into the job, a model that can pick up
that skill on the job on the fly. When
should we be expect such an AI system?
Yeah. So I guess what you're talking
about is like you know we've we're we're
doing this interview for 3 hours and
then like you know someone's going to
come in, someone's going to edit it,
they're going to be like oh you know you
know I don't know Dario like you know
scratched his head and you know we could
we could edit that out and you magnify
that. there was this like long there was
this like long discussion that like is
less interesting to people and then then
you know then there's other thing that's
like more interesting to people so you
know let's let's let's kind of make this
this edit so you know I think the
country of geniuses in a data center w
will be able to do that the the way it
will be able to do that is you know it
will have general control of a computer
screen right like you know and and and
you'll be able to feed this in and it'll
be able to also use the computer screen
to like go on the web look at all your
previous look at all your previous
interviews like look at what people are
saying on Twitter in response to your
interviews like talk to you ask you
questions talk to your staff look at the
history of kind of edits edits that you
did and from that like do the job um so
I think that's dependent on several
things one that's dependent and and and
and I think this is one of the things
that's actually blocking deployment um
getting to the point on computer use
where the models are really masters at
using the computer right and you know
we've seen this climb in in benchmarks
and benchmarks are always you know
imperfect measures but like you know OS
world is you know went from you know
like 5% a you know like uh I think when
we first re released you know uh uh
computer use like a a year and a quarter
ago it was like maybe 15% I don't
remember exactly but we've climbed from
that to like 65 or 70%. Um and and you
know there may be harder measures as
well but but I think computer use has to
pass a point of reliability. Can I just
ask to follow up on that before you move
to the next point? Um I often for years
I've been trying to build different
internal LLM tools for myself and I
often I have these text in text out
tasks which should be dead center in the
repertoire of these models and yet I
still hire humans to do them just
because it's if it's something like make
identify what the best clips would be in
this transcript and maybe they'll do
like a seven out of 10 job at them but
there's not this ongoing way I can
engage with them to help them get better
at the job the way I could with a human
employee and so that missing ability
even if you saw computer use would still
block my ability to like offload an
actual job to them.
>> Again, there's there's this gets back to
what to to kind to kind of what we were
talking about before with learning on
the job where it's it's very
interesting. You know, I think I think
with the coding agents like I don't
think people would say that learning on
the job is what is what is you know
preventing the coding agents from like
you know doing everything end to end
like they keep they keep getting better.
We have engineers at Enthropic who like
don't write any code. And when I look at
the productivity to your to your
previous question, you know, we have
folks who say this this GPU kernel, this
chip, I used to write it myself. I just
have Claude do it. And so there's this
there's this enormous improvement in
productivity. And I don't know like when
I see Claude code like familiarity with
the code base or like it you know or or
a feeling that the model hasn't worked
at the company for for a year that's not
high up on the list of complaints I see.
And so I think what I'm saying is we're
we're like we're kind of taking a
different path. Don't don't you think
with coding that's because there is an
external scaffold of memory which exists
instantiated in the codebase which I
don't know how many other jobs have
coding made fast progress precisely
because it has this unique um advantage
that other economic activity doesn't
>> but but when you say that what you're
what you're implying is that by reading
the code base into the context I have
everything that the human needed to
learn on the job. So that would be an
example of whether it's written or not,
whether it's available or not, a case
where everything you needed to know, you
got from the context window, right? And
that and that what we think of as
learning like, oh man, I started this
job, it's going to take me 6 months to
understand the codebase, the model just
did it in the context.
>> Yeah. I honestly don't know how to think
about this because there there are
people who qualitatively report what
you're saying. Um there was a meter
study I'm sure you saw last year where
they
>> had experienced developers try to close
uh pull requests in repositories that
they were familiar with and those
developers reported an uplift. They they
reported that they felt more productive
with the use of these models but in fact
if you look at their output and how much
was actually merged back in there's a
20% downlift. They were less productive
as a result of using these models. And
so I'm trying to square the qualitative
feeling that people feel with these
models versus um one in a macro level
where are all these where is this like
renaissance of software and two when
people do these independent evaluations
why are we not seeing the creative
benefits that we would expect
>> within anthropic this is just really
unambiguous right we're under an
incredible amount of commercial pressure
and make it even hard harder for
ourselves because we have all this
safety stuff we do that I think we do
more than than than other companies so
like the the the pressure to survive
economically while also keeping our
values is is just incredible, right?
We're trying to keep this 10x revenue
curve going. There's like there is zero
time for There is zero time
for feeling like we're productive when
we're not. Like these tools make us a
lot more productive. Like why why do you
think we're concerned about competitors
using the tools? because we think we're
ahead of the competitors and like we
don't we don't want to accel we we we we
wouldn't be going through all this
trouble if this was secretly reducing
reducing our productivity like we see
the end productivity every few months in
the form of model launches like there's
no kidding yourself about this like the
models make you more productive
>> um one that is people feeling like
they're more productive is qualitatively
predicted by studies like this but two
if I Look at the end output. Obviously,
you guys are making fast progress. But
the fact, you know, the the the idea was
supposed to be with recursive
self-improvement is that you make a
better AI, the AI helps you build a
better next AI, etc., etc. And what I
see instead, if I look at the you open
AI, deep mind, is that people are just
shifting around the podium every few
months. And maybe you think that stops
because you you won or whatever, but um
but why why are we not seeing the person
with the best coding model have this
lasting advantage if in fact there are
these enormous productivity gains from
the last model?
>> So no, no, no. I I I mean I mean I mean
I think it's all like my my model of the
situation is there's there's an
advantage that's gradually growing. Like
I would say right now the coding models
give maybe I don't know a a like 15
maybe 20% total factor speed up like
that's my view. Um uh and 6 months ago
it was maybe 5%. And so and so it didn't
matter like 5% doesn't register. It's
now just getting to the point where it's
like one of several factors that that
kind of matters and and that's gonna
that's going to keep speeding up. And so
I think 6 months ago like you know there
were several there were several
companies that were at roughly the same
point because uh you know this this
wasn't uh this wasn't a notable factor
but I think it's starting to speed up
more and more. I you know I I would I
would also say there are multiple
companies that you know write models
that are used for code and you know
we're not perfectly good at you know
preventing some of these other companies
from from from using from from from kind
of using our models internally. Um, so,
uh, you know, I think I think everything
we're kind kind of everything we're
seeing is consistent with this kind of,
um, this kind of snowball model where
where, you know, there's no hard. Again,
my my my my theme in all of this is like
all of this is soft takeoff, like soft
smooth exponentials, although the
exponentials are relatively steep. And
so and so we're seeing this snowball
gather momentum where it's like 10% 20%
25% you know for 40% and as you go yeah
AMD doll's law you have to get all the
like things that are preventing you from
from closing the loop out of the way but
like this is one of the biggest
priorities within anthropic. Um
stepping back I think before in the
stack we were talking about um well when
do we get this on the job learning and
it seems like the coding the point you
were making the coding thing is we
actually don't need on the job learning
uh that you can have tremendous
productivity improvements you can have
potentially trillions of dollars of
revenue for AI companies without this
basic human abil maybe that's not your
claim you should clarify um but without
this basic human ability to learn on the
job but I just look at like in in in
most domain of economic activity. People
say, "I hired somebody. They weren't
that useful for the first few months and
then over time they built up the context
understanding. It's actually hard to
define what we're talking about here,
but they they got something and then now
now they're they're a power horse and
they're so valuable to us." And if AI
doesn't develop this ability to learn on
the fly, I'm not I'm a bit skeptical
that we're going to see huge changes to
the world without
>> So I think I think I think two things
here, right? There's the state of the
technology right now um which is again
we have these two stages. We have the
pre-training and RL stage where you
throw you throw a bunch of data and
tasks into the models and then they
generalize. So it's like learning but
it's like learning from more data and
and not you know not learning over kind
of one human or one model's lifetime. So
again this is situated between evolution
and and and human learning. But once you
learn all those skills, you have them.
And and just like with pre-training,
just how the models know more, you know,
if if I look at a pre-trained model, you
know, it knows more about the history of
samurai in Japan than I do. It knows
more about baseball than I do. It knows,
you know, it knows more about, you know,
lowass filters and electronics and, you
know, all all of these things. Its
knowledge is way broader than mine. So I
think I think even even just that um you
know may get us to the point where the
models are better at you know kind of
better at everything and then we also
have again just with scaling the kind of
existing setup we have the in context
learning which I would describe as kind
of like human on the job learning but
like a little weaker and a little short
term like you look at in context
learning the you give the model a bunch
of examples it does get it there's real
learning that happens in context and
like a million tokens is a lot. That's
that's you know that can be days of
human learning right you know if you
think about the model you know you know
kind of read reading reading a million
words you know you know it takes me how
long would it take me to read a million
I mean you know like days or weeks at
least um uh so you have these two things
and and I think these two these two
things within the existing paradigm may
just be enough to get you the country of
geniuses in the data center I don't know
for sure but I think they're going to
get you a large fraction of it there may
be gaps but I I certainly think just as
things are this I believe is enough to
generate trillions of dollars of
revenue. That's one that's all one. Two
is this idea of continual learning. This
idea of a single model learning on the
job. Um I think we're working on that
too and I think there's a good chance
that in the next year or two we also
make we also solve that. Um I I again I
I I I you know I think you get most of
the way there without it. I think the
trillions of dollars of of you know the
the I think the trillions of dollars a
year market maybe all the national
security implications and the safety
implications that I wrote about in
adolescence of technology can happen
without it. But I I I also think we and
I imagine others are working on it. And
I think there's a good chance that that
you know that we get there within the
next year or two. There are a bunch of
ideas. I won't go into all of them in
detail, but um you know, one is just
make the context longer. There's there's
nothing preventing longer context from
working. You just have to train at
longer context and then learn to to
serve them at inference. And both of
those are engineering problems that we
are working on and that I would assume
others are working on as well. Yeah. So
this context length increase, it seemed
like there was a period from 2020 to
2023 where from GPD3 to GP4 Turbo, there
was an increase from like 2,000 context
lines to 128K. I feel like for the next
for the twoish years since then, we've
been in the sameish ballpark. Yeah. And
when model context lines get much longer
than that, people report qualitative
degradation in the ability of the model
to consider that full context. Um, so
I'm curious what you're internally
seeing that makes you think like, oh, 10
million context, 100 million contexts to
get human like six months learning
billion.
>> This isn't a research problem. This is a
this is an engineering and inference
problem, right? If you want to serve
long context, you have to like store
your entire KV cache. You have to, you
know, um, uh, you know, it's it's it's
it's difficult to store all the memory
in the GPUs to juggle the memory around.
I don't even know the detail, you know,
at this point. this is at a level of
detail that that that that I'm no longer
able to follow although you know I I
knew it in the GPD3 era of like you know
these are the weights these are the
activations you have to store um uh but
you know you know these days the whole
thing has flipped because we have models
and and and kind of all of that but um
uh and and this degradation you're
talking about like again without getting
too specific like a question I would ask
is like there's two things there's the
context length you train at and there's
a context length that you serve at if If
you train at a small context length and
then try to serve at a long context
length like maybe you get these
degradations.
>> It's better than nothing. You might
still offer it but you get these
degradations and maybe it's harder to
train at a long context length. Yeah.
So, you know, there's there's a lot I I
I want to at the same time ask about
like maybe some rabbit holes of like
well wouldn't you expect that if you had
to train on longer context length that
would mean that um you're able to get
sort of like less samples in for the
same amount of compute. But before maybe
it's not worth diving deep on that. I I
want to get an answer to the bigger
picture question, which is like, okay,
so
um I don't feel a preference for a human
editor that's been working for me for 6
months versus an AI that's been working
with me for 6 months. What year do you
predict that that will be the case?
>> I my I mean, you know, my guess for that
is, you know, there's there's a lot of
problems that are basically like we can
do this when we have the country of
geniuses in a data center. Um, and so,
you know, my my my my picture for that
is, you know, again, if you if you if
you if you know, if you made me guess,
it's like one to two years, maybe one to
three years. It's really hard to tell. I
have a I have a strong view 99 95% that
like all this will happen in 10 years.
Like that's I think that's just a super
safe bet. And then I have a hunch this
is more like a 50/50 thing that it's
going to be more like 1 to two, maybe
more like 1 to three.
>> So 1 to three years. country of genius
says um and then the slightly less
economically valuable task of editing
videos [laughter]
I
>> it seems pretty economically valuable
let me tell you it's just there are a
lot of use cases like that right there
are a lot of similar ones so you're
predicting that within 1 to 3 years um
and in gerally enthropic has predicted
that by late 26 early 27 we will have AI
systems that are quote um have the
ability to navigate interfaces available
to humans doing digital work today
intellectual capabilities matching or
exceeding that of Nobel prize winners
and the ability to interface with the
physical world. And then you gave an
interview two months ago with Dealbook
where you were emphasizing your um your
company's more responsible comput
scaling as compared to your competitors.
And I'm trying to square these two views
where if you really believe that we're
going to have a country of geniuses, you
you want as big a data center as you can
get, there's no reason to slow down. The
TAM of a Nobel Prize winner that is
actually can do everything a Nobel Prize
winner can do is like trillions of
dollars. And so I'm trying to square
this conservatism
uh which seems rational if you have more
moderate timelines with your stated
views about AI progress.
>> Yeah. So so it actually all fits
together and and we go back to this fast
but not infinitely fast diffusion. So
like let's say that we're making
progress at this rate. Um you know the
the the technology is making progress
this fast. Again, I have, you know, very
high conviction that like it's going,
you know, the the, you know, we're going
to get there within within a few years.
I have a hunch that we're going to get
there within a year or two. So, a little
uncertainty on the technical side, but
like, you know, pretty pretty strong
confidence that it won't be off by much.
What I'm less certain about is again the
economic diffusion side. Like I really
do believe that we could have models
that are a country of geniuses country
of geniuses in a data center in one to
two years. One question is how many
years after that do the trillions in you
know do do the do the trillions in
revenue start rolling in? Um I don't
think it's guaranteed that it's going to
be immediate. Um, you know, I think it
could be um one year, it could be two
years, I could even stretch it to five
years, although I'm like I'm skeptical
of that. And so we have this uncertainty
which is even if the technology goes as
fast as I suspect that it will, we we
don't know exactly how fast it's going
to drive revenue. We we know it's
coming, but with the way you buy these
data centers, if you're off by a couple
years, that can be ruinous. It is just
like how I wrote, you know, in machines
of loving grace, I said, look, I think
we might get this powerful AI, this
country of genius in the data center.
That description you gave comes from the
machines of loving grace. I said, we'll
get that 2026, maybe 2027. Again, that
is that is my hunch. Wouldn't be
surprised if I'm off by a year or two,
but like that is my hunch. Let's say
that happens. That's the starting gun.
How long does it take to cure all the
diseases, right? That's that's one of
the ways that like drives a huge amount
of of of of economic value, right? Like
you cure you cure every disease. You
know, there's a question of how much of
that goes to the pharmaceutical company
to the AI company, but there's an
enormous consumer surplus because
everyone, you know, assuming we can get
access for everyone, which I care about
greatly. We, you know, we we cure all of
these diseases. How long does it take?
You have to do the biological discovery.
you have to, you know, go you have to,
you know, manufacture the new drug. You
have to, you know, go through the
regulatory process. I mean, we saw this
with like vaccines and COVID, right?
Like it there's just this we we got the
vaccine out to everyone, but it took a
year and a half, right? And and so my
question is, how long does it take to
get the cure for everything, which AI is
the genius that can in theory invent out
to everyone? How long from when that AI
first exists in the lab to when diseases
have actually been cured for everyone
right in in you know we've had a polio
vaccine for 50 years we're still trying
to eradicate it in the most remote
corners of Africa and you know the
Gateson nation is trying as hard as they
can others are trying as hard as they
can but you know that's difficult again
I you know I don't expect most of the
economic diffusion to be as difficult as
that right that's like the most
difficult case but but there's a There's
a real dilemma here and and where I've
settled on it is it will be it will be a
it will be faster than anything we've
seen in the world but it still has its
limits and and so then when we go to
buying data centers you know you again
again again the curve I'm looking at is
okay we you know we've had a 10x a year
increase every year so beginning of this
year we're looking at 10 billion in in
in annual in you know rate of annual ize
revenue at the beginning of the year. We
have to decide how much compute to buy.
Um
and you know it takes a year or two to
actually build out the data centers to
reserve the data centers. So basically
I'm saying like in uh 2027 how much
compute do I get? Well I could assume um
uh that uh the uh revenue will continue
growing 10x a year. So it'll be uh one
uh one uh 100 billion at the end of 2026
and 1 trillion at the end of 2027. And
so I could buy a trillion dollar
actually would be like5 trillion dollars
of compute because it would be a
trillion dollar a year for for five
years, right? I could buy a trillion
dollars of compute that starts at the
end of 2027. And if my if my revenue is
not a trillion dollars, if it's even
800 billion, there's no force on earth,
there's there's no hedge on earth that
could stop me from going bankrupt if I
if I buy that much compute. And and so
even though a part of my brain wonders
if it's going to keep growing 10x, I
can't buy a trillion dollars a year of
compute in in in in in in in
2027. If I'm just off by a year in that
rate of growth, or if the the growth
rate is 5x a year instead of 10x a year,
then then you know that you go bankrupt.
Um and and and so you end up in a world
where you know you're supporting
hundreds of billions not trillions and
you accept you accept some risk that
there's so much demand that you can't
support the revenue and you accept still
some risk that you know you got it wrong
and it still slow and so when I talked
about behaving responsibly what I meant
actually was not the absolute amount
that that actually was not um you know I
think it is true we're spending somewhat
less than some of the other players.
It's actually the other things like have
we been thoughtful about it or are we
yoloing and saying, "Oh, we're going to
do $100 billion here, hundred billion
dollars there." I kind of get the
impression that, you know, some of the
other companies have not written down
the spreadsheet that they don't really
understand the risk they're taking.
They're just kind of doing stuff because
it sounds cool. Um uh and and we've
thought carefully about it, right? We're
an enterprise business. Therefore, you
know, we can rely more on revenue. It's
less fickle than consumer. We have
better margins, which is the buffer
between buying too much and buying too
little. And so, I think we bought an
amount that allows us to capture pretty
strong upside worlds. It won't capture
the full 10x a year. Um, and things
would have to go pretty badly for us to
be for us to be in financial trouble.
So, I think we've thought carefully and
we've made that balance. And and that's
what I mean when I say that we're being
responsible. Okay. So, it seems like um
it's possible that we're we actually
just have different definitions of the
country of a genius in a data center
because when I think of like actual
human geniuses, an actual country of
human geniuses in a data center, I'm
like
I would happily buy $5 trillion worth of
compute to run actual country of human
genius in a data center. So, let's say
JP Morgan or Madna or whatever doesn't
want to use them. Also, I've got a
country of geniuses. they they'll start
their own company and if like they they
can't start their own company and
they're bottlenecked by clinical trials.
It is worth stating with clinical trials
like most clinical trials fail because
the drug doesn't work. There's not
efficacy, right?
>> And I make exactly that point in in
machines of love and grace. I say the
clinical trials are going to go much
faster than we're used to, but not not
instant not infinitely fast.
>> And then suppose it takes a year to for
the clinical trials to work out so that
you're getting revenue from that and you
can make more drugs. Okay. Hey, well,
you've got a country of geniuses and
you're an AI lab and you have you could
use uh many more AI researchers. Um, you
also think that there's these like
self-reinforcing gains from, you know,
smart people working on AI tech. So,
like, okay, you can have the right you
can have the data center working on like
AI progress.
>> Is there more gains from buying
>> like substantially more gains from
buying a trillion dollars a year of
compute versus $300 billion a year of
compute? If your competitor is buying a
trillion, yes, there is.
>> Well, no, there's some gain, but then
but again, there's this chance that they
go bankrupt before,
you know, be again, if you're off by
only a year, you destroy yourselves.
That's the That's the balance. We're
buying a lot. We're buying a hell of a
lot. Like, we're not we're you know,
we're buying an amount that's comparable
to that that, you know, the the the the
biggest players in the game are buying.
Um but but if you're asking me why why
haven't we signed you know 10 10
trillion of compute starting in starting
in mid 2027 first of all it can't be
produced there isn't that much in the
world um uh but but second um what if
the country of geniuses comes but it
comes in mid 2028 instead of mid2027 you
go bankrupt. So if your projection is 1
to 3 years, it seems like you should
want $10 trillion of compute by um 2029
2020 maybe 2020 latest
>> like I mean you know you are like it
seems like even in your the longest
version of the timelines you state the
compute you are ramping up to build
doesn't seem
>> in accordance what what makes you think
that
>> well as you said you would want the 10
trillion the human wages let's say are
um on the order of 50 trillion a year
>> if you look at so so I won't I won't
talk about entropic in particular but if
you talk about the industry like um the
amount of compute the industry had you
know the the the the amount of compute
the industry is building this year is
probably in the you know I don't know
very low tens of you know call it 10 15
gawatts next year I you know it goes up
by roughly 3x a year so like next year's
30 or 40 gigawatts and um 2028 might be
100 202 might like three 300 gigawatts
and like each gigawatt costs like um
maybe 10 I mean I'm doing the math in my
head but each gigawatt costs maybe 10
billion you know order 10 to 15 billion
a year so you know you kind of you you
know you put that all together and
you're getting about about what you
described you're getting multiple
trillions a year by 2028 or 2029 so
you're you're getting exactly that
you're getting you're getting exactly
what you predict
>> um that's for the industry
>> that that's for the industry That's
right. So suppose anthropics comput
keeps 3xing a year and then by like 27
you have uh or 27 28 you have 10 gawatt
and like multiply that by as you say um
10 billion. So then it's like 100
billion a year but then you were saying
the TAM by 2028.
>> I I don't want to give exact numbers for
anthropic but but these numbers are too
small. These numbers are too small.
>> Okay. Interesting. I'm really proud that
the puzzles I've worked on with Jane
Street have resulted in them hiring a
bunch of people for my audience. Well,
they're still hiring and they just sent
me another puzzle. For this one, they
spent about 20,000 GPU hours training
backd doors into three different
language models. Each one has a hidden
prompt that elicits completely different
behavior. You just have to find the
trigger. This is particularly cool
because finding backd doorors is
actually an open question in Frontier AI
research. Enthropic actually released a
couple of papers about sleep agents and
they showed that you can build a simple
classifier on the residual stream to
detect when a back door is about to
fire, [music] but they already knew what
the triggers were because they built
them. Here you don't. And it's not
feasible to check the activations for
all possible trigger [music] phrases.
Unlike the other puzzles they made for
this podcast, Jane Street isn't even
sure this one is solvable, but they've
set aside $50,000 for the [music] best
attempts and write-ups. The puzzle's
live at janestreet.com/themarcash
and they're accepting submissions until
April 1st. All right, back to Dario.
You've told investors that you plan to
be profitable starting 28 and this is
the year where we're like potentially
getting the country of geniuses at a
data center and you know this is like
going to now unlock all this uh progress
and uh medicine and uh health and etc
etc and new technologies. Wouldn't this
be a particular exactly the time where
you'd like want to reinvest in the
business and build bigger countries so
they can make more discoveries?
>> So I mean profit profitability is this
kind of like weird thing in this field.
I I like like I don't think I I don't
think in this field profitability is
actually a measure of
uh um you know kind of spending down
versus investing in the business like
let's let's just let's just take a model
of this. I actually think profitability
happens when you underestimated the
amount of demand you were going to get
and loss happens when you overestimated
the amount of demand you were going to
get. Um because you're buying the data
centers ahead of time. So think about it
this way. Um ideally you would like and
again these are stylized facts. These
numbers are not exact for I'm just
trying to make a toy model here. Let's
say half of your compute is for training
and half of your compute is for
inference. Um, and you know the
inference has some gross margin that's
like more than 50%. Um, and so what that
means is that if you were in steady
state, you build a data center, if you
knew exactly exactly exactly the demand
you were getting, you would um uh uh uh
you know you would you would you you
would you would get a certain amount of
revenue. say, I don't know, uh, uh,
let's say you pay $100 billion a year
for compute and on $50 billion a year,
you support $150 billion on of of of of
revenue and the other 50 billion the
other 50 billion are used for training.
Um, so basically, you're profitable. You
make you make you make $50 billion of
profit. Those are the economics of the
industry today or or sorry, not today,
but like that's where we're where we're
projecting forward in a year or two. The
only thing that makes that not the case
is if you get less demand than 50
billion um then you have more than 50%
of your your data center for research
and you're not profitable. So you you
know you train stronger models but
you're like not profitable. Um if you uh
get more demand than you thought then
your research gets squeezed um but uh
you know you're you're you're kind of
able to support more inference and
you're more profitable. So it's maybe
I'm not explaining it well but but the
thing I'm trying to say is you decide
the amount of compute first and then you
have some target desire of of inference
versus versus training but that gets
determined by demand. It doesn't get
determined by
>> what I'm hearing is the reason you're
predicting profit is that you are
systematically underestimate uh
underinvesting in compute right because
if you actually
>> No I'm saying I'm saying it's hard to
predict. So, so these things about 2028
and when it will happen, that's our
that's our attempt to do the best we can
with investors, all of this stuff is
really uncertain because of the cone of
uncertainty. Like we could be profitable
in 2026 if the if the revenue grows fast
enough and then and then um uh you know
if we if we overestimate or
underestimate the next year that could
swing wildly. Like I I I what I'm trying
to get at is you have a model in your
head of like the the business invests
invests invests invests gets scale and
and and and kind of then becomes
profitable. There's a single point at
which things turn around. I don't think
the economics of this industry work that
way.
>> I see. So if I'm understanding
correctly, you're saying because of the
discrepancy between the amount of
compute we should have gotten and the
amount of compute we got, we we were
like sort of forced to make profit. But
that that doesn't mean we're going to
continue making profit. But we're going
to like reinvest the money because well
now AI has made so much progress and we
want the bigger country of geniuses and
so then back into uh revenue is high but
losses are also high. If we if we
predict if every year we predict exactly
what the demand is going to be will be
profitable every year because grow
because spending spending 50% of your
compute on on 50% of your compute on
research roughly um plus a gross margin
that's higher than 50%. And and correct
demand prediction leads to profit.
That's the prof that's that's the
profitable business model that I think
is kind of like there but like obsc
obscured by these like building ahead
and prediction errors. I
>> I guess you're treating the 50% as a uh
as a sort of like you know just like a
given constant whereas you in fact if
you if AI progress is fast and you can
increase the progress by scaling up more
you just have more than 50% and not make
profit.
>> Here's what I'll say. You might want to
scale up it more. you might want to
scale it up more, but but but you know,
remember the log returns to scale,
right? If if 70% would get you a very
little bit of a smaller model through a
factor of of 1.4x, right? like that
extra $20 billion is is is is you know
that each each dollar there is worth
much less to you because because the log
linear setup and so you might find that
it's better to invest that that that
that it's better to invest that $20
billion in you know in in serving
inference or in hiring engineers who are
who who are kind of better who are who
are kind of better who are kind of
better at what they're doing. So the the
reason I said 50% that's not that's not
exactly our target. It's not exactly
going to be 50%. It will probably vary
vary over time. What what I'm saying is
the the the the like log linear return
what it leads to is you spend of order
one fraction of the business, right?
Like not 5% not 95%. And then it then
you know then then then you get
diminishing returns because of the
because the walls that I'm like
convincing Dario to like believe in AI
progress or something but like uh okay
you you don't invest in research because
it has diminishing returns but you
invest in the other things you mentioned
>> again again we're talking about
diminishing returns
after you're spending 50 billion a year
right like this is a point I'm sure you
would make but like diminishing returns
on a genius is could be quite high and
more generally like what is profit put
in a market economy profit is basically
saying the other companies in the market
can like do more things with this money
that I
>> yeah put aside entropic I'm just trying
to like because I you know I don't want
to give information about entropic is
why I'm giving these stylized numbers
but like let's just derive the
equilibrium of the industry right I
think the so so so why doesn't everyone
spend 100% of their um uh you know 100%
of their compute on training and not
serve any customers right it's because
if They didn't get any revenue. They
couldn't raise money. They couldn't do
comput deals. They couldn't buy more
compute the next year. So, there's going
to be an equilibrium where every every
company spends less than 100% on on on
on on training and certainly less than
100% on inference. It should be clear
why you don't just serve the current
models and and you know and and and
never train another model because then
you don't have any demand because you
because you'll fall behind. So, there's
some equilibrium. It's it's not going to
be 10%, it's not going to be 90%. Let's
just say as a stylized fact it's 50%.
That's what I'm getting at. And and and
I think we're going to be in a position
where that equilibrium of how much you
spend on training is less than the gross
margins that that you're that that that
you're able to get on compute. And so
the the the the underlying economics are
profitable. The problem is you have this
this hellish demand prediction problem
when you're when you're buying the next
year of compute and you might guess
under and be very profitable but have no
compute for research or you might guess
over and you know you're you're you're
um uh you you are not profitable and you
have all the compute compute for
research in the world.
>> Does does that make sense just as a
dynamic model of the industry? May maybe
stepping back I'm like uh I I I'm not
saying I I think the country of genius
is going to come in two years and
therefore you should buy this compute.
Um to me what you're saying the end
conclusion you're arriving at makes a
lot of sense but uh that's because like
oh it seems like country geniuses is
hard and there's a long way to go. And
so the stepping back the thing I'm
trying to get at is more like
it seems like your worldview is
compatible with somebody who says uh
we're like 10 years away from a world in
which like we're generating trillions of
dollars.
>> That's just that's just not my view.
That is that is not my view. Like I I so
so I'll like I'll like make another
prediction. It is hard for me to see
that that there won't be trillions of
dollars in revenue before 2030. Um like
uh I can I can construct a plausible
world. It takes maybe three years. So
that that you know that would be the end
of what I think it's plausible like in
2028 we get the the real country of
geniuses in a data center. You know the
revenue's been been go you know the
revenue has been going into the maybe is
is in the low hundreds of billions by by
by by 2028 and and and then the country
of geniuses accelerates it to trillions,
you know, and and we're basically we're
basically on the slow end of diffusion.
It takes two years to get to the
trillions. that that that would that
that that would be the world where it
takes until that would be the world
where it takes until 2030. I I I suspect
even composing the technical exponential
and the diffusion exponential will get
there before 2030. So you laid out a
model where anthropic makes profit
because it seems like fundamentally
we're in a computed world and so it's
like eventually we keep growing comput.
Well, I think I think the way the profit
comes is again and and you know, let's
let's just abstract the whole industry
here. Like we have a you know, let's
just imagine we're we're in like an
economics textbook. We have a small
number of firms each can invest a
limited amount in you know or or or like
each can invest some fra fraction in
R&D. They have some marginal cost to
serve. the margins on that the profit
mar the gross profit margins on that
marginal cost are like very high because
because because because inference is
efficient there's some competition but
the models are also differentiated
there's some there's some um you know
companies will compete to push their
research budgets up but like because
there's a small number of players you
know we have the what is it called in
the corno equilibrium I think is what
the what the small number of firm
equilibrium is it the point is it it
doesn't equilibrate to perfect
competition with with with with with
with
zero margins. If there's like three
firms, if there's three firms in the
economy, all are kind of independently
behaving behaving rationally, it doesn't
equilibrate to zero.
>> Um, help me understand that because
right now we do have three leading firms
and they're not making profit. Um, and
so what what uh yeah, what what is
changing? Yeah. So the the again the
gross margins right now are very
positive. What's happen what what's
happening is a combination of two
things. One is we're still in the
exponential scale up phase of compute.
Um, so what basically what that means is
we're training like a model gets
trained, it costs, you know, let's say a
model got trained that costs uh a
billion last year. Um, and then uh this
year it produced uh $4 billion of
revenue and cost $1 billion to to uh to
to to inference from. Um so you know
again I'm using stylized number here but
you know that would be 75% you know
gross gross gross margins and you know
this this 25% tax. So that model as a
whole makes $2 billion. Um but at the
same time we're spending $10 billion to
train the next model because there's an
exponential scale up and so the company
loses money. Each model makes money but
the company loses money. The equilibrium
I'm talking about is an equilibrium
where we have the country of geniuses.
We have the country of geniuses in a
data center, but that that um model
training scale up has equilibrated more.
Maybe maybe it's still it's still going
up. We're still trying to predict the
demand, but it's more it's more um
leveled out. Um I'll give you a couple
things there. So, um let's start with
the current world. Um in the current
world, you're right that as you said
before, if you treat each individual
model as a company, it's profitable. But
of course, a big part of the production
function of being a frontier lab is
training the next model, right? So if
you didn't do that, then you'd make
profit for two months and then you
wouldn't have margins because you
wouldn't have the best model and then so
yeah, you can make profits for two
months on the current at some point that
reaches the biggest scale that it can
reach and then and then in equilibrium
we have algorithmic improvements, but
we're spending roughly the same amount
to train the next model as as as we
spent to train the current model. Um so
this equilibrium relies
>> I mean at some point at some at at some
point you run out of money in the
economy
>> uh a fixed lump of labor files the
economy is going to grow right that's
one of your predictions we're going to
have but this is but this is another
example of the theme I was talking about
which is that the economy will grow much
faster with AI than I think it ever has
before but it's not like right now the
compute is growing 3x a year I don't
believe the economy is going to grow
300% % a year. Like I said this in
Machines of Loving Grace, like I think
we we may get 10 or 20% per year growth
in the economy, but we're not going to
get 300% growth in the economy. So I
think I think in the end, you know, if
if compute becomes the majority of what
the economy produces, it's it's going to
be capped by that. So okay, now let's
assume a model where compute stays
capped. Yeah. Um, the world where
Frontier Labs are making money is one
where they continue to make um, fast
progress because fundamentally your
margin is limited by how good the
alternative is. And so you are able to
make money because you have a frontier
model. Um, if you didn't have frontier
model, you wouldn't be making money. Um,
>> and and so this this model requires
there never to be a steady state like
forever and ever you keep making more
progress.
>> I don't think that's true. True. I mean
I I feel feel like we're we're like
we're talk we're we're you know I feel
like this is an economics uh like uh you
know this is like an economics class you
know quote we never stop talking about
economics.
>> We never we never stop talking about
economics. So no but but there there are
worlds in which um you know there so I I
don't think this field's going to be a I
don't think this field's going to be a
monopoly. All my lawyers never want me
to say the word monopoly. Um but I don't
think this field's going to be a
monopoly. But but you do get you get
industries in which there are small
number of players, not one but a small
number of players. And ordinarily like
the the way you get monopolies like
Facebook or or Meta, I always call them
Facebook but um uh uh is is these kind
of is these kind of these kind of
network effects. The way you get
industries in which there are small
number of players are very high costs of
entry, right? Um so you know uh cloud is
like this. I think cloud is a good
example of this. You have three maybe
four players within cloud. I think I
think that's the same for AI. Three
maybe four. Um uh and the reason is that
it's it's so expensive. It requires so
much expertise and so much capital to
like run a cloud company, right? And so
you have to put up all this capital. And
then in addition to putting up all this
capital, you have to get all of this
other stuff that like, you know,
requires a lot of skill to, you know, to
make it happen. And so it's like if you
go to someone and you're like, I want to
disrupt this industry. Here's hundred
billion dollars. You're like, okay, I'm
putting $100 billion and also betting
that you can do all these other things
that these people have been doing
>> decrease the profit in the industry.
>> Yeah. And and and then and then the
effect of your entering is the profit
margins go down. And so you know we have
equilibria like this all the time in the
economy where we have a few we have a
few players profits are not astronomical
margins are not astronomical but they're
they're not zero right um uh and and you
know I think I think that's what we see
on cloud cloud is very undifferentiated
models are more differentiated than
cloud right like everyone knows claude
is claude claude is good at different
things than GPT is good at is than than
Gemini is good at and it's not just
claude's good at coding GP PT is good at
you know math and reasoning you know um
uh it's more subtle than that like
models are good at different types of
coding models have different styles like
I think I think these things are
actually you know quite different from
each other and so I would expect more
differentiation than you see in in um
cloud now there there actually is a uh
counter there there there is one
counterargument um and that
counterargument is that if all of that
the process of producing models
um becomes uh if AI models can do that
themselves, then that could spread
throughout the economy. But that is not
an argument for commoditizing AI models
in general. That's kind of an argument
for commoditizing the whole economy at
once. Um I don't know what what quite
happens in that world where basically
anyone can do anything, anyone can build
anything, and there's like no mode
around anything at all. I mean, I don't
know, maybe we want that world like like
maybe that's the maybe that's the end
state here. like maybe maybe um you know
when maybe when when when kind of AI
models can do you know when when when
when AI models can do everything if
we've solved all the safety and security
problems like you know that's one of the
one of the one of the mechanisms for for
uh you know um uh uh you know just just
kind of the economy flattening itself
again but but that's kind of like post
like far post country of geniuses in a
data center. Um maybe a finer way to put
that uh potential point is one um it
seems like AI research is especially
loaded on raw intellectual power which
will be especially abundant in a world
with AGI and two if you just look at the
world today there's very few
technologies that seem to be diffusing
as fast as um as AI algorithmic progress
and so that does hint that this industry
is sort of structurally diffusive
So I think coding is going fast but I
think AI research is a supererset of
coding and there are aspects of it that
are not going fast. Um uh but I but I do
think again once we get coding once we
get AI models going fast then you know
AI you know that will speed up the
ability of AI models to kind to kind of
do everything else. So I think while
coding is going fast now I think once
the AI models are building the next AI
models and building everything else the
kind of whole the whole economy will
kind of go at the same pace. I am I am
worried geographically though. I'm a
little worried that like just proximity
to AI having heard about AI um uh that
that that may be one differentiator. And
so when I said the like you know 10 or
20% growth rate a worry I have is that
the growth rate could be like 50% in
Silicon Valley and you know parts of the
world that are kind of socially
connected to Silicon Valley and you know
not that much faster than its current
pace elsewhere and I think that'd be a
pretty messed up world. So I one of the
things I think about a lot is how to
prevent that.
>> Yeah. Do you think that once we have uh
this country of geniuses in a data
center that robotics is sort of quickly
solved afterwards because it seems like
a big problem with robotics is that um a
human can learn how to teleoperate
current hardware but current AI models
can't at least not not in a way that's
super productive and so if we have this
ability to learn like a human should it
solve robotics immediately as well
>> I don't think it's dependent on learning
like a human it could happen in
different ways again we could have
trained the model on many different
video games which like robotic controls
or many different simulated robotics
environments or just you know train them
to control computer screens and they
learn to generalize. So it will happen.
It's not necessarily dependent on
humanlike learning. Humanlike learning
is one way it could happen. If the
model's like, "Oh, I pick up a robot. I
don't know how to use it. I learn that.
That could happen because we discovered
discovering continual learning." That
could also happen because we train the
model on a bunch of environments and
then it generalized. Or it could happen
because the model learns that in the
context length. It it doesn't actually
matter which way. If we go back to the
discussion we had like like an hour ago,
that type of thing can happen in that
type of thing can happen in several
different ways. Um uh uh but but I do
think when for for whatever reason the
models have those skills then uh
robotics will be revolutionized both the
design of robots because the models will
be much better than humans at that um
and also the the ability to kind of
control robots. So we'll get better at
the physical building the physical
hardware building the physical robots
and we'll also get better at controlling
it. Now you know does that mean the
robotics industry will also be
generating trillions of dollars of
revenue? My answer there is yes but
there will be the same extremely fast
but not infinitely fast diffusion. So
will robotics be be revolutionized?
Yeah, maybe tack on another year or two.
>> That's that's my that's the way I think
about these things.
Uh there's a general skepticism about
extremely fast progress. Like here
here's my view which is like it sounds
like you are going to solve continual
learning one way or another within a
matter of years. But just as people
weren't talking about continual learning
a couple years ago and then we realized
oh why aren't these models as useful as
they could be right now even though they
are clearly passing the touring test and
are experts in so many different
domains. Maybe it's this thing. And then
we solve this thing and we realize
actually there's another
um another thing that human intelligence
can do. that's a basis of human labor
that these models can't do. And then so
why not think there will be more things
like this? Why I think that like we're
we're you know we've like found the
pieces of human intelligence.
>> Well well to be clear I mean I think
continual learning as I've said before
might not be a barrier at all right like
like you know I think I think we maybe
just get there by pre-training
generalization and and and and and and
RL generalization. Like I I think there
just might not be um there basically
might not be such a thing at all. In
fact, I would point to the history in in
ML of people coming up with things that
are barriers that end up kind of
dissolving within the big blob of
compute, right? That, you know, people
talked about, you know,
you know, how do you have, you know, how
do how do your models keep track of
nouns and verbs and, you know, how do
they, you know, they can understand
semant syntactically, but they can't
understand semantically. You know, it's
only statistical correlations. You can
understand a paragraph, but you can't
understand a word. There's reasoning,
you can't do reasoning, but then
suddenly it turns out you can do code
and math very well at all. So
>> I I think there actually there's there's
actually a stronger history of some of
these things seeming like a big deal and
then and then kind of and then kind of
dissolving. Some of them are real. I
mean the need for data is real. May
maybe continual
continual learn continual learning is a
real thing. But again, I would ground us
in something like code. Like I think we
may get to the point in like a year or
two where the models can just do end to
end. Like that's a whole task. That's a
whole sphere of human activity that that
we're just saying models can do it now.
Um when you say end to end, do you mean
um setting technical direction,
understanding the context of the
problem, etc.? Okay. Yes. I mean all of
that. Interesting. I mean that that is I
feel like AGI complete um which maybe is
internally consistent but um it's not
like saying 90% of code or 100% of code
it's like no no the other parts of the
>> no no I gave this I gave the spectrum
90% of code 100% of code 90% of N10
suite 100% of N10 suite new tasks are
created for SWES eventually those get
done as well but it's a long spectrum
there but we're traversing the spectrum
very quickly
>> um I do think it's funny that I I've
seen a couple podcasts you've done where
um the host will be like a butcher wrote
the essay about the control learning
thing and it always makes me crack up
because you're like you know you've been
an AI researcher for like 10 years and
I'm sure there's like some uh feeling of
like okay so podcaster wrote an essay
[laughter] like every interview I get
asked about it
>> you know the the truth of the truth of
the matter is that we're all trying to
figure this out together right there
there are some ways in which I'm able to
see things that others aren't these days
That probably has more to do with like I
can see a bunch of stuff within
Enthropic and have to make a bunch of
decisions than I have any great research
insight that that that others don't.
Right? I you know I'm running a 2500
person company. Like it's it's actually
pretty hard for me to have have concrete
research insight you know much harder
than you know than than it would have
been you know 10 years ago or or you
know or even two or three years ago. Um,
as we go towards a world of a full drop
in remote worker replacement, does a API
pricing model still make the most sense?
And if not, what is the correct way to
price AGI or serve AGI?
>> Yeah, I mean, I think there's going to
be a bunch of different business models
here sort of all at once that are going
to be that are going to be experimented
with. Um, I I I actually do think that
the the API
um
model is is more durable than many
people think. Um, one way I think about
it is if the technology is kind of
advancing quickly, if it's advancing
exponentially, what that means is
there's there's always kind of like a
surface area of of kind of new use cases
that have been developed in in the last
uh in the last three months. And any
kind of product surface you put in place
is always at risk of sort of becoming
irrelevant, right? Any given product
surface probably makes sense for, you
know, a range of capabilities of the
model, right? The the chatbot is already
running into limitations of, you know,
making it smarter doesn't really help
the average consumer that much. But I
don't think that's a limitation of AI
models. I don't think that's evidence
that, you know, the models are are the
models are good enough and they're
they're, you know, them getting better
doesn't matter to the economy. It
doesn't matter to that particular
product. Um, and and so I think the
value of the API is the API always
offers an opportunity, you know, very
close to the bare metal to build on what
the latest thing is. Um, and so there,
you know, there's there's there's kind
of always going to be this, you know,
this this kind of front of new startups
and new ideas that weren't possible a
few months ago and are possible because
the model is advancing. And and so I I
actually I I I kind of actually predict
that we are it's going to exist
alongside other models, but we're always
going to have the API business model
because there's there's always going to
be a need for a thousand different
people to try experimenting with the
model in different way and a hundred of
them become startups and 10 of them
become big successful startups and you
know two or three really end up being
the the way that people use the model of
a of a given generation. So I I
basically think it's always going to
exist. At the same time, I'm sure
there's going to be other models as
well. Like not every token [snorts]
that's output by the model is worth the
same amount. Think about, you know, how
how what is the value of the tokens that
are like, you know, that the model
outputs when someone, you know, call,
you know, someone, you know, calls them
up and says, "My Mac isn't working or
something." You know, the model's like,
"Restart it, right?" Yeah.
>> And like you know someone hasn't heard
that before but like you know the model
said that like 10 million times you know
that maybe that's worth like a dollar or
a few cents or something. Um whereas if
uh the model you know the model goes to
you know one of the one of the
pharmaceutical companies and it says oh
you know this molecule you're developing
you should take the aromatic ring from
that end of the molecule and put it on
that end of the molecule. Um and and you
know if you do that wonderful things
will happen. um uh like like those
tokens could [laughter] be worth, you
know, tens of millions of dollars,
right? Um uh so so I think we're
definitely going to see business models
that that recognize that, you know, at
some point we're going to see, you know,
pay for results or you know, in some in
some form or we may see forms of
compensation that are like labor um uh
you know, that that kind of work by the
hour. Um I I I you know, I don't Oh, I
think I think I think because it's a new
industry, a lot of things are going to
be tried and I you know I don't know
what will turn out to be the right
thing.
>> Um what I find uh I I take your point
that people will have to try things to
figure out what is the best way to use
this blob of intelligence. But what I
find striking is clawed code. So I don't
think in the history of startups there
has been a single application that has
been as hotly competed in as coding
agents and um and and cloud code is a
category leader here and that seems
surprising to me like it doesn't seem
intrinsically like enthropic had to
build this and I wonder if you have an
accounting of why it had to be enthropic
or why how enthropic ended up building
an application in addition to the model
underlying it. Yeah. So it actually
happened in a pretty simple way which is
we had our own um you know we had our
coding models which were good at coding
and and you know around the beginning of
2025 I said I I think the time has come
where you can have non-trivial
acceleration of your own research um if
you're an AI company by using these
models and of course you know we you
need an interface you need a harness to
use them and so I encourage people
internally you know I didn't say this is
one thing that you know you have to use.
I I just said people should experiment
with this and then you know this thing I
think it might have been originally
called claude CLI and then the name
eventually got changed to cloud code
internally um was the thing that kind of
everyone was using and it was seeing
fast internal adoption and I looked at
it and I said probably we should launch
this externally right um uh you know
it's it's seen such fast adoption within
anthropic like you know like you know
coding is a lot of what we do and and so
you know we have a we have audience of
many many hundreds of people that's in
some ways at least representative of the
external audience. So it looks like we
already have product market fit. Let's
launch this thing. Um and and then we
launched it and and and I think you know
just just the fact that we ourselves are
kind of developing the model and we
ourselves know what we most need to use
the model. I think it's it's kind of
creating this feedback loop.
>> I see. in the sense that you let's say a
developer at Enthropic is like ah it it
would be better if it was better at this
X thing and then you bake that into the
next model that you build that that's
that's one version of it but but then
there's just the ordinary product
iteration of like you know we have a
bunch of we have a bunch of coders
within anthropic like we um you know
they like use cloud code every day and
so we get fast feedback that was more
important in the early days now of
course there are millions of people
using it um and so we get a bunch of
external feedback as well. But it's, you
know, it's just great to be able to get,
you know, kind of kind of uh um fast
fast internal feedback. You know, I
think this is the reason why we launched
a coding model and, you know, didn't
launch a pharmaceutical company, right?
It you know, you know, my background is
in in my background's in in like
biology, but like we don't have any of
the resources that are needed to launch
a pharmaceutical company. So, there's
been a ton of hype around OpenClaw, and
I wanted to check it out for myself.
I've got a day coming up this weekend
and I don't have anything planned yet.
So, I gave Open Claw a Mercury debit
card. I set a couple hundred limit and I
said, "Surprise me." Okay, so here's the
Mac Mini it's on. And besides having
access to my Mercury, it's totally
quarantined. They actually felt quite
comfortable giving it access to a debit
card because Mercury makes it super easy
to set up guardrails. I was able to
customize permissions, cap the spend,
and restrict the category of purchases.
I wanted to make sure the debit card
worked, so I asked OpenCloud to just
make a test transaction and decided to
donate a couple bucks to Wikipedia.
Besides that, I have no idea what's
going to happen. I will report back on
the next episode about how it goes. In
the meantime, if you want a personal
banking solution that can accommodate
all the different ways that people use
their money, even experimental ones like
this one, visit mercury.com/personal.
Mercury is a fintech company, not an
FDIC insured bank. Banking services
provided through Choice Financial Group
and column NA members FDIC. You know,
she thinks we're getting coffee and
walking around the neighborhood.
[laughter]
Um let me ask you about now um making AI
go well. Um it seems like whatever
vision we have about how AI goes well
has to be compatible with two things.
One is the ability to build and run AIs
is diffusing extremely rapidly and two
is that the population of AIS the amount
we have in their intelligence will also
increase very rapidly and that means
that lots of people will be able to
build huge populations of misaligned AIs
or uh AIs which are just like companies
which are trying to increase their uh
footprint or have weird psyches like
Sydney Bing but now they're superhuman.
What is a vision for a world in which we
have an equilibrium that is compatible
with lots of different AI some of which
are misaligned running around?
>> Yeah. Yeah. So I think you know in the
adolescence of technology I was kind of
you know skeptical of like the balance
of power but I I think I was
particularly skeptical of or the thing I
was specifically skeptical of is you
have like three or four of these
companies like kind of all building
models that are kind of derive you know
sort of sort of um uh uh like derived
from the like derived from the same
thing and uh you know that that these
would check each or or even that kind of
you know any number of them would would
would would uh would would check each
other like we might live in a offense
dominant world where you know like one
person or one AI model is like smart
enough to do something that like causes
damage for everything else. Um I think
in the I mean in the short run we have a
limited number of players now. So we can
start by within the limited number of
players we uh you know we kind of you
know we we need to put in place the you
know the safeguards. We need to make
sure everyone does the right alignment
work. we need to make sure everyone has
bio classifiers like you know those are
those are kind of the immediate things
we need to do. I agree that you know
that that doesn't solve the problem in
the long run particularly if the ability
of AI models to make other AI models
proliferates then you know the the whole
thing can kind of um you know can become
harder to solve. You know I think I
think in the long run we need some
architecture of governance right some
some architecture of governance that
preserves human freedom but but kind of
also allows us to like you know govern
the the very large number of kind of um
you know uh uh uh human systems AI
systems hybrid hybrid human human um you
know hybrid hybrid human AI like you
know companies or or like or like or
like economic units. So, you know, we're
we're going to need to think about like,
you know, how do we how do we protect
the world against, you know,
bioteterrorism? How do we protect the
world against like, you know, against
like against like mirror life? Like, you
know, pro probably we're going to need
to, you know, need some kind of like AI
monitoring system that like moni, you
know, kind of monitors for for all these
things, but then we need to build this
in a way that like, you know, preserves
civil liberties and like our
constitutional rights. So I think just
just as is as is anything else like it's
it's like a new security landscape with
a new set of you know a new set of tools
and a new set of vulnerabilities. And I
I think my worry is if we had a hundred
years for this to happen all very
slowly, we'd get used to it, you know,
like we've gotten used to like, you
know, the presence of, you know, the
presence of explosives in society or
like the, you know, the presence of
various um, you know, like new weapons
or the, you know, the pre the presence
of video cameras. Um, we would get used
to it over over over over 100 and we'd
develop governance mechanisms. We'd make
our mistakes. My my worry is just that
this is happening all so fast and so I
think maybe we need to do our thinking
faster about how to make these
governance mechanisms work.
>> Yeah, it seems like in a offense
dominant world
over the course of the next century. So
the idea is AI is making the progress
that would happen over the next century
happen in some period of 5 to 10 years.
But we would still need the same
mechanisms or balance of power would be
similarly intractable even if humans
were the only game in town. Um, and so I
guess we have the advice of AI. We it
fundamentally doesn't seem like a
totally different ballgame here. If
checks and balances were going to work,
they would work with humans as well. If
they aren't going to work, they wouldn't
work with AIS as well. Um, and so maybe
this just dooms human checks and
balances as well. But yeah, again, I
think there's some way to I think
there's some way to make this happen.
Like it, you know, it just it just, you
know, the governments of the world may
have to work together to make it happen.
like you know we may have to you may
have to talk to AIS about kind of you
know building societal structures in
such a way that like these these
defenses are possible. I I I don't know.
I mean this is so this is you know I
don't want to say so far ahead in time
but like so far ahead in technological
ability that may happen over a short
period of time that it's hard for us to
anticipated in advance. Um, speaking of
governments getting involved, on
December 26th, the Tennessee legislature
introduced a bill which uh said, quote,
um, it would be an offense for a person
to knowingly train artificial
intelligence to provide emotional
support, including through open-ended
conversations with a user. And of
course, one of the things that Claude
attempts to do is be uh a thoughtful um
thoughtful friend, thoughtful,
knowledgeable friend. And in general, it
seems like we're going to have this
patchwork of state laws. A lot of the
benefits that normal people could
experience as a result of AI are going
to be curtailed, especially when we get
into the kinds of things you discussed
in machines of love and grace,
biological freedom, mental health
improvements, etc., etc. It seems easier
to imagine worlds in which these get
whack-a-ole away by different laws. Um,
whereas
bills like this don't seem to address
the actual existential threats that
you're concerned about. So I'm curious
about to understand in the context of
things like this your anthropics
position against the federal moratorium
on state AI laws.
>> Yes. So I don't know there's there's
many different things going on at once,
right? I think I think that that I think
that particular law is is dumb. Like you
know I think it was it was clearly made
by legislators who just probably had
little idea what AI models could do and
not do. They're like AI models serving
as that just sounds scary. Like I don't
want I don't want that to happen. So,
you know, we're we're we're not we're
not in favor of that, right? But but but
that, you know, that that wasn't the
thing that was being voted on. The thing
that was being voted on is we're going
to ban all state regulation of AI for 10
years with no apparent plan to to do any
federal regulation of AI, which would
take Congress to pass, which is a very
high bar. Um so you know the idea that
we'd ban states from doing anything for
10 years and people said they had a plan
for federal government but you know
there was no actual there was no
proposal on the table. There was no
actual attempt. Um given the serious
dangers that I lay out in adolescence of
technology around things like the you
know kind of biological weapons and
bioteterrorism autonomy risk and the
timelines we've been talking about like
10 years is an eternity. like that's
that's a that's a I I think that's a
crazy thing to do. So if if that's the
choice, if that's what you force us to
choose, then then we're going to we're
going to choose not to have that
moratorum. And you know, I think the the
the benefits of that position exceed the
costs. But it's it's not a perfect
position if that's the choice. Now, I
think the thing that we should do, the
thing that I would support is the
federal government should step in, not
saying states you can't regulate, but
here's what we're going to do and and
states you can't differ from this,
right? Like I think preeemption is fine
in the sense of saying that federal
government says here's our standard.
This applies to everyone. States can't
do something different. That would be
something I would support if it would be
done in the right way. What um but but
this idea of states you can't do
anything and we're not doing anything
either that that struck that struck us
as you know very much not making sense
and I think will not age well it's
already starting to not age well with
with all the um backlash that that
you've seen now in terms of in terms of
what we would want I mean you know the
things we've talked about are are
starting with transparency standards um
uh uh you know in order to monitor some
of these autonomy risks and bio
terrorism risks as the risks become more
serious um as we as we get more evidence
for them then I think we could be more
aggressive in some targeted ways and and
say hey AI bioteterrorism is really a
threat let's let's pass a law that kind
of forces people to have classifiers and
I could even imagine it it depends it
depends how serious a threat it ends up
being we don't know for sure and we need
to pursue this in an intellectually
honest way where we say ahead of time
the risk has not emerged yet but I could
certainly imagine with the pace that
things are going that you know I could
imagine a world where later this year we
say hey this this AI bioteterrorism
stuff is really serious we should do
something about it we should put it in a
federal we should you know put it in a
federal standard and if the federal
government won't act we should put it in
a state standard I could totally see
that I I I'm concerned about a world
where
if you just consider the the pace of
progress you're expecting the life cycle
of of legislation you the the benefits
are, as you say, because of diffusion
lag, the benefits are slow enough that I
really do think this patchwork of on the
current trajectory, this patchwork of
state laws would prohibit. I mean,
having an emotional chatbot friend is
something that freaks people out, then
just imagine the kinds of actual
benefits from AI we want normal people
to be able to experience from
improvements in health and health span
and improvements in mental health and so
forth. whereas at the same time uh it
seems like you think the dangers are
already on the horizon and I just don't
see that much um it seems like would be
especially injurious to the benefits of
AI uh as compared to the the dangers of
AI and so that that's maybe the where
the cost benefit makes less sense to me.
So, so, so there's a few things here,
right? I mean, people talk about there
being thousands of these state laws.
First of all, the vast vast majority of
them do not pass. Um, and you know, the
the the the you know, the world works a
certain way in theory, but like just
because a law has been passed doesn't
mean it's really enforced, right? The
people the people you know implementing
it may be like, "Oh my god, this is
stupid." It would mean shutting off
like, you know, everything that's ever
been built and everything that's ever
been built in Tennessee. So, you know,
very often laws are interpreted in like,
you know, a way that makes them that
that that makes them not as dangerous or
not as harmful. On on the same side, of
course, you have to worry if you're
passing a law to stop a bad thing, you
had this you had this problem as well.
Yeah. Um uh look my my look I mean my
basic view is you know if if if
you know we could decide you know what
laws were passed and how things were
done which you know we're only one small
input input into that you know I would
deregulate a lot of the stuff around the
health benefits of AI. Um I think you
know I I don't worry as much about the
like the the the kind of chatbot laws. I
I actually worry more about the drug
approval process where I think AI models
are going to greatly accelerate um the
rate at which we discover drugs and just
the the pipeline will get jammed up like
the pipeline will not be prepared to
like process all all of the stuff that's
going through it. So um you know I I I
think I think reform of the regulatory
process to buy us more towards we have a
lot of things coming where the safety
and the efficacy is actually going to be
really crisp and clear like I mean a
beautiful thing really really crisp and
clear and like really really effective
but you know and and and maybe we don't
need all this all this um uh uh like um
all this superructure around it that was
designed around an era of drugs that
barely work and often and have serious
side effects. Um but at the same time I
think we should be ramping up quite
significantly the um uh you know this
this kind of safety and security
legislation and you know like I've said
um you know starting with transparency
is is my view of trying not to hamper
the industry right trying to find the
right balance. I'm worried about it.
Some people criticize my essay for
saying that's too slow. The dangers of
AI will come too soon if we do that.
Well, basically I kind of think like the
last 6 months and maybe the next few
months are going to be about
transparency. And then if these ris if
these risks emerge when we're more
certain of them, which I think we might
be as soon as as later this year, then I
think we need to act very fast in the
areas that we've actually seen the risk.
Like I think the only way to do this is
to be nimble. Now the legislative
process is normally not nimble but we we
need to emphasize to everyone involved
the urgency of this. That's why I'm
sending this message of urgency, right?
That's why I wrote adolescence of
technology. I wanted policy makers to
read it. I wanted economists to read it.
I want national security professionals
to read it. You know, I want decision
makers to read it so that they have some
hope of acting faster than they would
have otherwise. Is there anything you
can do or advocate that would
make it more certain that the benefits
of AI are um are better instantiated
where I feel like you have worked with
legislators to be like okay we're going
to prevent biotterism here way we're
going to increase we're going to
increase whistleblower protection and I
just think by default the actual ben
like the things we're looking forward to
here it just seems very easy they seem
very fragile to uh different kinds of
moral panics or political economy
problems.
>> Yeah, I don't actually so so I don't
actually agree that much in the
developed world. I feel like, you know,
in the developed world like markets
function pretty well and when there's
when there's like a lot of money to be
made on something and it's clearly the
best available alternative, it's
actually hard for the regulatory system
to stop it. You know, we're we're seeing
that in AI itself, right? I you know,
like a thing I've been trying to fight
for is export controls on chips to
China, right? And like that's in the
national security interests of the US
like you know that's like square within
the you know the the policy beliefs of
you know every almost everyone in
Congress of both parties but and you
know I think the case is very clear. The
counterarguments against it are I'll
politely call them fishy. Um uh and yet
it doesn't happen and we sell the chips
because there's there's so much money
there's so much money riding on it. um
and you know the the that money wants to
be made and and in that case in my
opinion that's a bad thing. Um and but
but it also it also applies when when
it's a good thing and and so I I don't
think that if we're talking about drugs
and benefits of the technology I I I I
am not as worried about those benefits
being hampered in the developed world. I
am a little worried about them going too
slow and I as I said I do think we
should work to speed the approval
process in the FDA. I do think we should
fight against these chatbot bills that
you're describing right described
individually. I'm against them. I think
they're stupid. Um but I actually think
the bigger worry is a developing world
um where we don't have functioning
markets where um you know we often can't
build on the technology that that we've
had. I worry more that those folks will
get left behind. And I worry that even
if the cures are developed, you know,
maybe there's someone in rural
Mississippi who who doesn't get it as
well. Right? That's a that's a that's a
kind of smaller version of the thing the
concern we have in the in the developing
world. And so the things we've been
doing are you know you know we work with
you know we work with you know
philanthropists right you know we work
with folks um who you know who you know
deliver you know medicine and health
interventions to you know to to
developing world to subsaharan Africa
you know India Latin America you know
you know other other developing parts of
the world that's the thing I think that
won't happen on its own you mentioned
export controls Yeah.
>> Why can't US and China both have a
country of geniuses
>> on a data center?
>> Why can't you know why won't it happen
or why should
>> why shouldn't it happen?
>> Why shouldn't it happen? Um, you know, I
think I think if this does happen, um,
you know, then then we kind of have a
well, we could have a few situ if we
have like an offense dominant situation.
We could have a situation like nuclear
weapons, but like more dangerous, right?
Where it's like um, you know, kind of
kind of either side could could easily
destroy everything. Um, we could also
have a world where it's kind of it's
unstable. Like the nuclear equilibrium
is stable, right? Because it's, you
know, it's like deterrence. But let's
say there were uncertainty about like if
the two AIs fought, which AI would win.
Um, that could create instability,
right? You often have conflict when the
two sides have a different assessment of
their likelihood of winning, right? If
one side is like, oh yeah, there's a 90%
chance I'll win. And the other side's
like, there's a 90% chance I'll win,
then then a fight is much more likely.
Um, they can't both be right, but they
can both think that. But this seems like
a fully general argument against the
diffusion of AI technology which it may
which is that's the implication of this
world.
>> Let me let me just go on because I think
we will get diffusion eventually. The
other concern I have is that people the
governments will oppress their own
people with AI and and and so um you
know I'm I'm just I'm worried about some
world where you have a country that's
already you know kind of a uh you know
you know there's there's a government
that kind of kind of already um you know
is is kind of kind of building a you
know a tech high-tech authoritarian
state. Um and to be clear this is about
the government. this is not about the
people like people we need to find a way
for people everywhere to benefit. Um my
worry here is about governments. Um so
yeah my you know my my worry is the
world gets carved up into two pieces one
of those two pieces could be
authoritarian or totalitarian in a way
that's very difficult to displace. Um
now will will governments eventually get
powerful AI and and you know there's
risk of authoritarianism? Yes. Will
governments eventually get powerful AI
and there's risk of um uh you know of of
kind of bad bad bad equilibria? Yes, I
think both things, but the initial
conditions matter, right? You know, at
at some point we're need we're going to
need to set up the rules of the road.
I'm not saying that one country, either
the United States or a coalition of
democracies, which I think is would be a
better setup, although it requires more
international cooperation than we
currently seem to want to make. Um, but
you know, I don't I don't think a
coalition of democracies or or certainly
one country should just say these are
the rules of the road. There's going to
be some negotiation, right? The world is
going to have to grapple with this. And
what I would like is that the the the
democratic nations of the world, those
with, you know, who are clo whose
governments have represent closer to
prohuman values are are holding a
stronger hand then have have more
leverage when the rules of the road are
set. And and so I'm I'm very concerned
about that initial condition. I um I was
relisting to an interview from three
years ago and one of the ways it aged
poorly is that I kept asking questions
assuming there's going to be some key
fulcrum moment two to three years from
now when in fact being that far out it
just seems like progress continues AI
improves AI is more diffused and people
will use it for more things. It seems
like you're imagining a world in the
future where the countries get together
and here's the rules of the road and
here's the leverage we have, here's the
leverage you have when it seems like on
current trajectory, everybody will have
more AI. Um, some of that AI will be
used by authoritarian countries. Some of
that within the authoritarian countries
will be by private actors versus state
actors. It's not clear who will benefit
more. It's always unpredictable to tell
tell in advance. You know, it seems like
the internet privileged authoritarian
countries more than you would have
expected. Um, and maybe the AI will be
the opposite way around. Um so I I I
want to better understand what you're
imagining here.
>> Yeah. Yeah. So so just to be precise
about it, I think the exponential of the
underlying technology will continue as
it has before, right? The models get
smarter and smarter even when they get
to country of geniuses in a data center.
You know, I I think you can continue to
make the model smarter. There's a
question of like getting diminishing
returns on their value in the world,
right? How much does it matter after
you've already solved human biology or
you know you know at some point you can
do harder math you can do more abstuse
math problems but nothing after that
matters but putting that aside I do
think the the exponential will continue
but there will be certain distinguished
points on the exponential and companies
individuals countries will reach those
points at different times um and and so
you know there's there's you know could
there be some you know you know I talk
about is a nuclear deterrent still in
adolescence of technology is a nuclear
deterrent still stable uh in the world
of of of AI I don't know but that's
that's an example of like one thing
we've taken for granted that like the
technology could reach such a level that
it's no longer like you know we can no
longer be certain of it at least um uh
you know think of think of others you
know there there you know there there
are kind of points where if you if you
reach a certain point you maybe you have
offensive cyber dominance and like every
every computer system is transparent to
you after that. Um, unless the other
side has a has a kind of equivalent
defense. So, I don't know what the
critical moment is or if there's a
single critical moment. But I think
there will be either a critical moment,
a small number of critical moments or
some critical window where it's like AI
is AI confers some large advantage from
the perspective of national security and
one country or coalition has reached it
before others that that you know that
that that you know I'm not advocating
that they're just like okay we're in
charge now. That's not that's not how
that's not how I think about it. you
know that there's always the the other
side is catching up. There's extreme
actions you're not willing to take and
and and it's not right to take, you
know, to take complete um to take
complete control anyway. But but at at
the point that that happens, I think
people are going to understand that the
world has changed. And there there's
going to be some negotiation, implicit
or implicit, about what what is the what
is the post AI world order look like?
And and I think my interest is in,
you know, making that ne negotiation
be one in which, you know, classical
liberal democracy has, you know, has a
strong hand. Well, I want to understand
what that better means because you say
in the essay, quote, autocracy is simply
not a form of government that people can
accept in the post powerful AI. And that
sounds like you're saying the CCP as an
institution cannot exist after we get
AGI. Um, and that seems like
a like a very strong demand and it seems
to imply a world where the leading lab
or the leading country will be able to
and by that language should get to
determine how the world is governed or
what kinds of governments are allowed
and not allowed.
>> Yeah. So when I when I um I I believe
that paragraph was I think I said
something like you could take it even
further and say X. So I wasn't I wasn't
necessarily endorsing that that that I
wasn't necessarily endorsing that view.
I you know I was saying like here's if
first you know here here's a weaker
thing that I believe you know I think I
you know I think I said you know we have
to worry a lot about authoritarians and
you know we should try and you know kind
of kind of check them and limit their
power. Like you could take this kind of
further much more interventionist view
that says like authoritarian countries
with AI are these you know the the you
know the these kind of self-fulfilling
cycles that that you can't that are very
hard to displace and so you just need to
get rid of them from from the beginning
that that has exactly all the problems
you say which is you know you know if
you were to make a commitment to
overthrowing every authoritarian country
I mean they then they would take a bunch
of actions now that like you know that
that that could could lead to
instability so that that may or you know
that that just that just may not be
possible. But the point I was making
that I do endorse is that it is it is
quite possible that you know today you
know the view or at least my view or the
view in most the western world is is
democracy is a better form of government
than authoritarianism. But it's not like
if a country is authoritarian, we don't
react the way we reacted if they
committed a genocide or something,
right? And and I'm I guess what I'm
saying is I'm a little worried that in
the age of AGI, authoritarianism will
have a different meaning. It will be a
graver thing. Um and and we have to
decide one way or another how to h how
to deal with that. And the
interventionist view is one possible
view. I was exploring such views. um you
know
it may end up being the right view. It
it may end up being too extreme to be
the right view. But I do have hope and
one piece of hope I have is
there there is we have seen that as new
technologies are invented
forms of government become obsolete. I I
mentioned this in adolescence of
technology where I said you know like
feudalism was basically you know like a
form of government right and and then
when when we invented industrialization
feudalism was no longer sustainable it
no longer made sense why is that hope
couldn't that imply that democracy is no
longer going to be a competitive system
>> it it could right it could go it could
go either way right but but I actually
so I these problems with
authoritarianism, right? That the
problems with authoritarianism get
deeper. I just I wonder if that's an
indicator of other problems that
authoritarianism will have, right? In
other words, people become because
authoritarianism becomes worse, people
are more afraid of authoritarianism.
They work harder to stop it. It's it's
more of a like you have to think in
terms of total equilibrium, right? Um, I
just wonder if it will motivate new ways
of thinking about with the with with the
new technology how to preserve and
protect freedom
>> and and even more optimistically, will
it lead to a collective reckoning and,
you know, a kind of a a more emphatic
realization of how important some of the
things we take as individual rights are,
right? a more emphatic realization that
we just we really can't give these away.
There's there we've seen there's no
other way to live that actually works.
Um I I I I am actually I am actually
hopeful that I I guess one way to say it
it sounds too idealistic but I actually
believe it could be the case is is that
is that dictatorships become morally
obsolete. They become morally unworkable
forms of government. Um and that and
that and that the the the the crisis
that that creates is is is sufficient to
force us to find another way. Um I I
think there is genuinely a tough
question here which I'm not sure how you
resolve for and we've had to come out
one way or another on it through history
right so with China in the 70s and ' 80s
we decided even though it's an
authoritarian system we will engage with
it and I think in retrospect that was
the right call because it has stayed
authoritarian system but a billion plus
people are much wealthier and better off
than they would have otherwise been um
and it's not clear that it would have
stopped being an authoritarian country
otherwise you can just look at North
Korea uh as an example of that, right?
And I don't know if that takes that much
that much intelligence to remain an
authoritarian country that continues to
coales its own power. And so you can
just imagine a North Korea with an AI
that's much worse than everybody else's
but still enough to keep power and and
and and then so in general it seems like
should we just have this attitude of the
benefits of AI will in the form of all
these empowerments of humanity and
health and so forth will be big and in
historically we have decided it's good
to spread the benefits of technology
widely even with even to people whose
governments are authoritarian and I
think I guess it is a tough question how
to think about it with AI but um
historically we have said Yes, this
there this is a positive some world and
it's still worth diffusing technology.
>> Yeah. So so there are a number of
choices we have. I you know I think
framing this as a kind of government to
government decision and and you know in
in national security terms that's like
one lens but there are a lot of other
lenses like you could imagine a world
where you know we produce all these
cures to diseases and like the you know
the the the cures to diseases are fine
to sell to authoritarian countries. The
data centers just aren't right. the
chips and the data centers just aren't
um and that the AI industry itself. Um
uh you know like like another
possibility is and and I think folks
should think about this like you know
could there be developments we can make
either that naturally happen as a result
of AI or that we could make happen by
building technology on AI. Could we
create an equilibrium where where it
becomes infeasible for authoritarian
countries to deny their people kind of
private use of the benefits of the
technology? Um uh you know are there are
there are there are there equilibria
where we can kind of give everyone in
authoritarian country their own AI model
that kind of you you know like defends
themselves from surveillance and there
isn't a way for the authoritarian
country to like crack crack down on this
while while retaining power. I don't
know that that sounds to me like if that
went far enough it would be it would be
a reason why authoritarian countries
would disintegrate from the inside. Um
but but maybe there's a middle world
where like there there's an equilibrium
where if they want to hold on to power
the authoritarians can't deny kind of
individualized access access to the
technology. But I actually do have a
hope for the for the um for the for the
more radical version which is you know
is it possible that the technology might
inherently have properties or that by
building on it in certain ways we could
create properties um that that that that
have this kind of dissolving effect on
authoritarian structures. Now, we we
hoped originally, if we think back to
the beginning of the Obama
administration, we thought originally
that that, you know, social media and
and the internet would have that
property, and it turns out not to. But,
but I I don't know what what if we could
uh what if we could try again with with
the knowledge of how many things could
go wrong and that this is a different
technology. I don't know that it would
work, but it's worth a try.
>> Yeah. I think it's just it's very
unpredictable. Like there's first
principles reasons why authoritarianism.
>> It's all very unpredictable. I I don't
think I mean we got to we we just got to
we kind of we got to recognize the
problem and then we got to come up with
10 things we can try and we got to try
those and then assess whether they're
working or which ones are working if any
and and then try new ones if the old
ones aren't. I guess what that nets out
to today is you say we will not sell
data centers or sorry chips and then the
ability to make chips to China and so in
some sense you are denying there would
be some benefits to that's right the
Chinese economy Chinese people etc
because we're doing that and then
there'd also be benefits to the American
economy because it's a positive sum
world we could trade they could have
their country data centers doing one
thing we could have ours doing another
and already we you're saying it's not
worth that positive sum
stipend to empower this country's
>> what what I would say is that you know
we are we are about to be in a world
where growth and economic value will
come very easily if right if we're able
to build these powerful AI models growth
and economic value will come very easily
what will not come easily is
distribution of benefits distribution of
wealth political freedom um you know
these are the things that are going to
be hard to achieve and so when I think
about policy
I think I think that the technology and
the market will deliver all the
fundamental benefits, you know, almost
almost faster than we can take them. Um
uh and and that these questions about
about distribution and political freedom
and rights are are are the ones that
that will actually matter and that
policy should focus on. Okay. So
speaking of distribution, as you're
mentioning, we have developing countries
and
>> um
>> in many cases catchup growth has weak
been weaker than we would have hoped
for. When catchup growth does happen,
it's fundamentally because they have
underutilized labor and we can bring the
capital and knowhow from developed
countries to these countries and then
they can grow quite rapidly.
>> Obviously in a world where labor is no
longer the constraining factor, this
mechanism no longer works.
>> And so is the hope basically to rely on
philanthropy from the people who
immediately get wealthy from AI or from
the countries that get wealthy from AI?
What what is the hope for? Yeah, I I
mean philanthropy should obviously play
some role as it has the you know as has
in the past but I think growth is always
growth is always better and stronger if
we can make it endogenous. So you know
what are the relevant industries in like
in like in like in like an AI driven
world. Look there's lots of stuff you
know like there's you know I said I said
we shouldn't build data centers in China
but there's no reason we shouldn't build
data centers in Africa right? Um in fact
I think it'd be great to build data
centers in Africa. um you know as not
long as they're not owned by China. We
should we should build we should build
data centers in Africa. I think that's a
that's that's I think that's a great
thing to do. um you know we should also
build you know there's no reason we
can't build you know a pharmaceutical
industry that's like AIdriven like you
know the the if if AI is accelerating
accelerating drug discovery then you
know there will be a bunch of biotech
startups like let's make sure some of
those happen in the developing world and
certainly during the transition I mean
we can talk about the point where humans
have no role but but humans will have
still have some role in starting up
these companies and supervising
supervising the AI models so let's make
sure some of those humans are humans in
developing world so that fast growth can
happen there as well.
>> You guys recently announced quad is
going to have a constitution that's
aligned to a set of values and not
necessarily just the end user and
there's a world you can imagine where if
it is aligned to the end user it
preserves the balance of power we have
in the world today because everybody
gets to have their own AI that's
advocating for them and so the ratio of
bad actors to good actors stays
constant. It seems to work out for our
world today. Um why is it better not to
do that but to have a specific set of
values that the AI should carry forward?
>> Uh yeah so I'm not sure I'd quite draw
the distinction in that way. Um there
there are maybe two relevant
distinctions here which are I think
you're talking about a mix of the two
like one is should we give the model a
set of instructions about do this and
versus don't do this
>> and the other you know versus should we
give the model a set of principles for
you know for kind of how to act. Um and
and and there it's it's you know it's I
you know it's it's just p it's kind of
purely a practical and empirical thing
that we've observed that by teaching the
model principles getting it to learn
from principles its behavior is more
consistent. It's easier to cover edge
cases and the model is more likely to do
what people want it to do. In other
words, if you, you know, if you're like,
you know, don't tell people how to
hotwire a car, don't speak in Korea, and
don't, you know, you know, just, you
know, if you give it a list of rules, it
doesn't really understand the rules, and
it's kind of hard to generalize from
them. Um, you know, if if it's just kind
of a like, you know, list of do dos and
don'ts. Whereas, if you give it
principles and then, you know, it has
some hard guard rails like don't make
biological weapons. But overall you're
trying to understand
what it should be aiming to do h how it
should be aiming to operate. So just
from a practical perspective that turns
out to be just a more effective way to
train the model. That's one piece of it.
So that you know it's the kind of rules
versus principles trade-off. Then
there's another thing you're talking
about which is kind of like the
cageability versus um like you know I
would say kind of intr intrinsic
motivation trade-off which is like how
much should the model be a kind of I
don't know like a a skin suit or
something where you know you know you
know you just kind of you know it just
kind of directly follows the
instructions that are given to it by
whoever is giving it those instructions.
um versus how much should the model have
an inherent set of values and and go off
and do things on its own. Um and and and
and and there I I would actually say
everything about the model is actually
closer to the direction of of like you
know it should mostly do what people
want. It should mostly follow the we're
not trying to build something that like
you know goes off and runs the world on
its own. We're actually pretty far on
the corable side. Now, now what we do
say is there are certain things that the
model won't do, right? That it's like
you know that that that I think we say
it in various ways in the constitution
that under normal circumstances if
someone asks the model to do a task it
should do that task that that should be
the default. Um but if you've asked it
[snorts] to do something dangerous or if
you've you know if you've um asked it to
um you know uh uh uh to kind of harm
someone else um then the model is
unwilling to do that. So I I actually
think of it as like a mostly a mostly
corable model that has some limits but
those limits are based on principles.
>> Yeah. I mean then the fundamental
question is how are those principles
determined? And this is not a special
question for anthropic. would be a
question for any company but um
>> uh because you have been the ones to
actually write down the principles I get
to ask you this question normally a
constitution is like you write it down
it's set in stone and there's a process
of updating it and changing it and so
forth in this case it seems like a
document that people anthropic write
that can be changed at any time that
guides the behavior of systems are going
to be the basis of a lot of economic
activity what is H how do you think
about ho how those principles should be
set?
>> Yes. Um so I think there's there's two
there's maybe three
three kind of sizes of loop here, right?
Three three ways to iterate. One is you
can iterate. We iterate within
enthropic. We train the model. We're not
happy with it and we kind of change the
constitution.
>> And I think that's good to do. Um and
you know putting out publicly you know
making updates to the constitution every
once in a while saying here's a new
constitution. I think that's good to do
because people can comment on it. The
second level of loop is different
companies will have different
constitutions. Um and you know I think
it's useful for like anthropic puts out
a constitution and you know you the
Gemini model puts out a constitution and
you know other companies put out a
constitution and then then they can kind
of look at them compare outside
observers can critique and say this this
I like this one this thing from this
constitution and this thing for that
constitution and and then kind of that
that creates some kind of you know soft
incentive and feedback for all the
companies to like take the best of each
elements and improve Then I think
there's a third loop which is you know
society beyond the AI companies and
beyond just those who kind of you know
who who comment on the constitutions
without hard power and and there you
know we've done some experiments like
you know a couple years ago we did an
experiment with I think it was called
the collective intelligence project to
like um you know to to basically pull
people and ask them what should be in
our AI constitution. um uh and and you
know I think at the time we incorporated
some of those changes and so you could
imagine with the new approach we've
taken to the constitution doing
something like that it's a little harder
because it's like that was actually an
easier approach to take when the
constitution was like a list of dos and
don'ts um at the level of principles it
has to have a certain amount of
coherence um but but you could you could
still imagine getting views from a wide
variety of people and I think you could
also imagine and this is like a crazy
idea but hey you know this whole
interview is about crazy ideas, right?
So, um uh you know, you could even
imagine systems of of kind of
representative government having having
input, right? Like, you know, I wouldn't
I wouldn't do this today because the
legislative process is so slow. Like
this is exactly why I think we should be
careful about the legislative process
and AI regulation. But there's no reason
you couldn't in principle say like you
know all AI you know all AI models have
to have a constitution that starts with
like these things and then like you can
append you can append other things after
it but like there has to be this special
section that like takes precedence. I
wouldn't do that. That's too rigid. That
that sounds um you know that that that
that sounds kind of overly prescriptive
in a way that I think overly aggressive
legislation is. But like that is a thing
you could you know like like that is
that is a thing you could try to do. Is
is there some much less heavy-handed
version of that? Maybe I really like
control loop too. um where obviously
this is not how constitutions of actual
governments do or should work where
there there's not this vague sense in
which the Supreme Court will feel out
how people are feeling and what are
their vibes and then update the of the
constitution accordingly. There's with
actual governments there's a more
procedural process. Exactly. But you
actually have a vision
>> of competition between constitutions
which is actually very reminiscent of
how um
>> some libertarian charter cities people
used to talk about what an archipelago
of different kinds of governments could
look like and then there would be
selection among them of who could
operate the most effectively in which
place people would be the happiest. And
in a sense you're actually yeah there's
this vision. I'm I'm kind of recreating
that.
>> Yeah. Yeah. This utopia of archipelago,
>> you know, again, you know, I think I
think that vision has has, you know,
things to recommend it and things that
things things that will kind of kind of
go wrong with it. You know, I think I
think it's a I think it's an interesting
in some ways compelling vision, but also
things will go wrong with it that you
hadn't that you hadn't imagined. So, you
know, I I I like loop 2 as well, but I I
I feel like the whole thing has got to
be some some mix of loops one, two, and
three. And it's it's a matter of the
proportions, right? I I think that's got
to be the the answer.
>> Um
>> when somebody eventually writes the
equivalent of the making of the atomic
bomb for this era, what is the thing
that will be hardest to glean from the
historical record that they're most
likely to miss? I think a few things.
One is at every moment of this
exponential, the extent to which the
world outside it didn't understand it.
This is this is a bias that's often
present in history where anything that
actually happened looks inevitable in
retrospect and and so you know I I think
when people when people look back it
will be hard for them to put themselves
in the place of people who were actually
making a bet on this thing to happen
that wasn't inevitable that we had these
arguments like the arguments you know
that I make for scaling or that
continual learning will be solved um uh
uh you know that that you know some of
us internally in our heads put a high
probability on this happening but but
it's like there's there's a world
outside us that's not that's not acting
on it's not kind of not acting on that
at all. Um uh and and and I think I
think the the weirdness of it um I I I I
think unfortunately like the insolerity
of it like you know
if if we're one year or two years away
from it happening like the average
person on the street has no idea and
that's one of the things I'm trying to
change like with the memos with talking
to policy makers but like I don't know I
think I I I think that's just a that's
just like a crazy that's just like a
crazy thing. Yeah. Um, finally I would
say and and this probably applies to
almost all historical moments of crisis.
Um, how absolutely fast it was
happening, how everything was happening
all at once. And so decisions that you
might think, you know, were kind of
carefully calculated, well, actually you
have to make that decision and then you
have to make 30 other decisions on the
on the same day because it's all
happening so fast and and you don't even
know which decisions are going to turn
out to be consequential. So, you know,
one of my one of my I guess worries,
although it's also an insight into into,
you know, into kind of what's happening
is that, you know, some very critical
decision will be will be some decision
that, you know, someone just comes into
my office and is like, Dario, you have
two minutes like, you know, should we
should we do, you know, should we do
thing thing A or thing B on this like,
you know, someone gives me this random,
you know, half page half page memo and
is like, should we should we do A or B?
And I'm like, I don't know. I have to
eat lunch. Let's do B. And and you know,
that ends up being the most
consequential thing ever.
>> So, final question. Uh, it seems like
you have
there's not tech CEOs who are usually
writing 50page memos every few months,
and it seems like you have managed to
build a role for yourself and a company
around you which is compatible with this
more intellectual type role of CEO. And
I want to understand how you construct
that and how like how does that work to
be you just go away for a couple weeks
and then you tell your company this is
the memo like here's what we're doing.
It's also reported you write a bunch of
these internally.
>> Yeah. So I mean for this particular one
you know I wrote it over winter break.
Um uh so it was the time you know and I
was having a a hard time finding the
time to actually find it to actually
write it. But I actually think about
this in a broader way. Um I actually
think it relates to the culture of the
company. So I probably spend a third
maybe 40% of my time making sure the
culture of Enthropic is good. As
Enthropic has gotten larger, it's it's
gotten harder to just, you know, get
involved in like, you know, directly
involved in like the training of the
models, the launch of the models, the
building of the products. Like it's 2500
people. It's like, you know, there's
just, you know, I have certain
instincts, but like there's only, you
know, I it's very difficult to get to
get to get involved in every single
detail. You know, I like I I try as much
as possible, but one thing that's very
leveraged is making sure Anthropic is a
good place to work. People like working
there. Everyone thinks of themselves as
team members. Everyone works together
instead of against each other. And you
know, we've seen as some of the other AI
companies have grown without naming any
names, you know, we're starting to see
decoherence and people fighting each
other. And you know, I would argue there
was even a lot of that from the
beginning, but but you know, that it's
it's gotten worse. But I I think we've
done an extraordinarily good job, even
if not perfect, of holding the company
together, making everyone feel the
mission, that we're sincere about the
mission, and that, you know, everyone
has faith that everyone else there is
working for the right reason, that we're
a team, that people aren't trying to get
ahead at each other's expense or
backstab each other, which again, I
think happens a lot at some of the other
places. Um, and and how do you make that
the case? I mean it's a lot of things
you know it's me it's it's it's Daniela
who you know runs the company dayto-day
it's the co-founders it's the other
people we hire it's the environment we
try to create but I think an important
thing in the culture is I some and you
know the the you know the other leaders
as well but especially me have to
articulate what the company is about why
it's doing what it's doing what its
strategy is what its values are what its
mission is and what it stands for And um
you know when you get to 2500 people you
can't do that person by person. You have
to write or you have to speak to the
whole company. This is why I get up in
front of the whole company every two
weeks and speak for an hour. It's
actually I mean I wouldn't say I write
essays internally. I do two things. One
I write this thing called DVQ Dario
Vision Quest. Um uh uh I wasn't the one
who named it that. That's the name it it
it received and it's one of these names
that I kind of I tried to fight it
because it made it sound like I was like
going off and smoking peyote or
something. Um uh but but the name just
stuck. Um so I get up in front of the
company every two weeks. I have like a
three or four page document and I just
kind of talk through like three or four
different topics about what's going on
internally the you know the the models
we're producing the products the outside
industry the world as a whole as it
relates to AI and geopolitically in
general you know just some mix of that
and I just go through very very honestly
I just go through and I just I just say
you know this is this is what I'm
thinking this is what anthropic
leadership is thinking and then I answer
questions and and that direct connection
I think has a lot of value that is hard
to achieve when you're passing things
down the chain you know six six levels
deep um uh and you know large fraction
of the company comes comes to attend
either either in person or um either in
person or virtually and you know it
really means that you can communicate a
lot and then the other thing I do is I
just you know I have a channel in Slack
where I just write a bunch of things and
comment a lot um and often that's in
response to you know just things I'm
seeing at the company or questions
people ask or like you know we do
internal surveys and there are things
people are concerned about and so I'll
write them up and I'm like I'm you know
I'm I'm I'm just I'm very honest about
these things you know I just I just say
them very directly and the point is to
get a reputation of telling the company
the truth about what's happening to call
things what they are to acknowledge
problems to avoid the sort of corpo
speak the kind of defensive
communication that often is necessary in
public because you know the world is
very large and full of people who are
you know interpreting things in bad
faith. Um but you know if you have a
company of people who you trust and we
try to hire people that we trust then
then you know you can you can you can
you know you can you can really just be
entirely unfiltered. Um and uh you know
I think I think that's an enormous
strength of the company. It makes it a
better place to work. It makes people
more you know more the sum of their
parts and increases likelihood that we
accomplish the mission because everyone
is on the same page about the mission
and everyone is debating and discussing
how best to accomplish the mission.
>> Well in lie of an external Dario vision
quest we have this interview.
>> This this interview is a little like
that.
>> Uh this is fun Dario. Thanks for doing
it.
>> Yeah thank you Dash. Hey everybody I
hope you enjoyed that episode. If you
did the most helpful thing you can do is
just share it with other people who you
think might enjoy it. It's also helpful
if you leave a rating or a comment on
whatever platform you're listening on.
If you're interested in sponsoring the
podcast, you can reach out [music] at
dwarcash.com/advertise.
Otherwise, I'll see you on the next one.

Okay, I'm joined again by my friends uh
Schultter Bricken. Wait, [ __ ]
Did I do this last? No, no, you named us
differently, but we didn't have Shto
Bricken and Trenton Douglas. Shelto
Douglas and Trenton Bricken. Um, uh, who
are now both at Entropic?
Uh, Shto scaling RL. Trenton still
working on mechanistic interpability.
Um, welcome back. Happy to be here.
Yeah, it's fun. What's changed since
last year? We talked basically this
month in 2024. Now we're in 2025. What's
happened? Okay, so I think the biggest
thing that's changed is RL and language
models has finally worked. Um, and this
is manifested in we finally have proof
of an algorithm that can give us expert
human reliability and performance given
the right feedback loop. And so I think
this is only really being like
conclusively demonstrated in competitive
programming and math basically.
uh and so if you think of these two
axes, one is uh the like intellectual
complexity of the task and the other is
the time horizon of which the task is uh
is being completed on um and I think we
have proof that we can we can reach the
peaks of intellectual complexity uh
along along many dimensions. uh we
haven't yet demonstrated like longunning
agentic uh performance and you're seeing
like the first stumbling steps of that
now and should see much more like
conclusive evidence of that basically by
the end of the year u with like real
software engineering agents doing real
work um and I think Trenton you're like
experimenting with this at the moment
right yeah absolutely I mean the most
public example people could go to today
is Claude plays Pokemon right uh and
seeing it struggle in a way that's like
kind of painful to watch but each model
generation gets further through the
game. Uh, and it seems more like a
limitation of it being able to use uh
memory system than anything else. Yeah.
Um, I wish we had recorded predictions
last year. We definitely should this
year. Oh, yeah. Hold us accountable.
Yeah, that's right. Would you have said
that agents would be only this powerful
as of last year? I think this is roughly
on track for where I expected with
software engineering. I think I expected
them to be a little bit better at
computer use. Uh but I understand all
the reasons for why that is and I think
that's like well on track to be solved.
It's just like a sort of temporary uh
lapse. Um
and holding accountable for like my
predictions next year like I really do
think end of this year sort of like this
this time next year we have software
engineering agents that can do close to
a day's worth of work um for like a
junior engineer or like a couple of
hours of like quite competent
independent work. Yeah, that that seems
right to me. I think the distribution is
pretty wonky though where like for some
tasks I don't know like boiler
boilerplate website code these sorts of
things it can it can bang it out and
save you a whole day. Um uh yeah I think
that's right. I think last year you said
that the thing that was holding them
back was the extra nines of reliability.
I don't know if that's the way you'd
still describe the way in which these
software agents aren't able to do a full
day of work but are able to help you out
with a couple minutes. Is it is it the
extra nines that's really stopping you
or is it something else? Yeah, I think
my description there was I think like
like in retrospect probably not what's
limiting them. Uh I think what we're
seeing now is closer to uh lack of
context um lack of ability to like do
complex like very multifile changes and
like uh sort of like maybe like scope or
or of the change or scope of like the
task in some respects like you can they
can cope with high intellectual
complexity in like a focused context
with a with a very like scoped problem.
Um, but when something's a bit more
amorphous or requires a lot of discovery
and iteration with the environment, this
kind of stuff, they're they struggle
more. Um, and and so maybe the the way I
would define it now as the thing that's
holding them back is if you can give it
a good feedback loop for the thing that
you want it to do, then it's good. It's
pretty good at it. If you can't, then
they struggle a bit. Can you and then
for the audience, can you say more about
what you mean by this feedback loop? Um,
if they're not aware of what's happening
RL and so forth. Yes. Uh so the big
thing that really worked over the last
year is uh maybe like broadly the domain
is called like RL from verifiable
rewards or something like this where a
clean reward signal. So so you know the
initial unhopping of language models was
RL from human feedback where you know
typically was something like pairwise
feedback or something like this and and
the outputs of the models became closer
and closer to things that humans wanted.
Yeah. uh but this doesn't necessarily
improve their performance at any like
like difficulty of problem domain right
particular as humans are actually quite
bad judges of what what a better answer
is humans have things like length biases
and and and so forth so you need a
signal of whether the model was correct
in its output that is uh that is like
quite true let's say uh and so things
like the correct answer to a math
problem or unit tests passing this kind
of stuff these are the examples of uh a
reward signal that's very clean. But
even these can be hacked by the way.
Like even unit tests, the models find
ways around it to like hack in
particular values and hardcode values of
unit tests. If they can figure out like
what the actual test is doing, like if
they can like look at the cached Python
files and find what the actual test is,
they'll they'll try and hack their way
around it. So these aren't perfect, but
they're they're much closer. And why has
it gotten so much better at software
engineering than everything else? Uh in
part because software engineering
is very verifiable.
uh like it's a domain which just
naturally lends it to this way. I think
does the code pass a test? Does it even
run? Does it compile? Yeah. Does it
compile? Does it pass the test? U you
know, you can go on le code and you can
run like tests and like you know whether
or not you got the right answer. Um but
there isn't the same kind of thing for
like writing a great essay. That
requires
uh like the question of like taste in
that regard is quite hard. like we
discussed the other night at dinner um
the pullet surprise like you know which
would come first like a pullet surprise
winning novel or like you know a Nobel
Prize or something like this and I
actually think a Nobel Prize is more
likely than a pullet surprise winning
novel um in some respects because a lot
of the the tasks required in in winning
a Nobel Prize or at least like strongly
assisting in helping it the to win a
Nobel Prize have more like layers of
verifiability built up. So I I expect
them to like accelerate the process of
dis of doing Nobel Prize winning work
more initially than uh that of like
writing Pullet surprisew worthy novels.
Yeah, I think if we rewind 14 months to
when we recorded last time, the nines of
reliability was was right to me. Um like
we didn't have clawed code, we didn't
have deep research. All we did was use
agents in a chatbot format, right? Copy
paste, copy paste, copy paste. Totally.
And I and it's I think we're very used
to chat interfaces whether we're texting
or using Google. Uh and it's weird to
think that the agent can actually go and
fetch its own context and store its own
facts into its memory system. Uh and I
still think that it's the nines's
reliability and and if you scaffold the
model correctly or prompt it, it can do
much more sophisticated things than the
average user assumes. Uh, and so like
one of my friends, Sam Rodriguez, who
does Future House, they've discovered a
new drug that they're in the process of
patenting, and by the time this episode
comes out, that will be that will be
live. What was that? LSDV2.
Wait, is it really?
No, no, they're not making
LSD. But, uh, like people didn't think
that models can be creative or do new
science, right? And it does just kind of
seem like a skill issue. I mean, there
was the cool uh wait but like the it
discovered a drug. Is it how did it like
I think it one-shotted the this was just
over a conversation and so we'll need to
refer to the full announcement. But my
impression is that um it was able to
read a huge amount of medical literature
and brainstorm and make new connections
and then propose wet lab experiments
that the humans did. And then through
iteration on that, they verified that
this like new compound does this thing
that's really exciting. Um, another
critique I've heard is like LLM can't
write creative long- for books. Um, and
I'm aware of at least two individuals
who probably want to remain anonymous
who have used LLMs to write long form
books. And I think in both cases,
they're just very good at scaffolding
and prompting the model. I mean, even
with the viral um chat GPT uh geogesser
capabilities where it's just insanely
good at spotting like what beach you
were on from a photo. Um Kelsey Piper,
who I think made this viral, um their
their prompt is so sophisticated. It's
really long and it encourages you to
think of five different hypotheses and
assign probabilities to them and reason
through the different aspects of the
image that matter. And I haven't AB
tested it, but I think unless you really
encourage the model to be this
thoughtful, you wouldn't get the level
of performance that you see with with
that ability. So you're bringing up ways
in which people have constrained what
the model is outputting to get like the
good part of the distribution. But one
of the critiques I've heard of RL or the
um not of RL but one of the critiques
I've heard about using the success of
models like 03 to suggest that we're
like getting new capabilities from these
reasoning models is that all these
capabilities were already baked in the
pre-training model. I think there's a
paper from uh Stingwall University where
they showed that if you give a base
model enough tries um to answer a
question, it can still answer the
question um as well as the reasoning
model. Basically, it just has a lower
probability of answering. So, you're
you're narrowing down um the the
possibilities that the model explores
when it's answering a question. Um, so
are we actually eliciting new
capabilities with this RL training or
are we just like um putting the blinders
on them, right? Like carving away the
marbles or this. Um, I think it's like
it's worth noting that that paper was
I'm pretty sure on like the llama and
Quen models. Um, and I'm not sure how
much uh like RL compute they used, but I
don't think it was anywhere comparable
to the amount of compute that was used
in the in the base models. And so I
think like the amount of compute that
you use in training is like a decent
proxy for the amount of like actual like
raw new knowledge or capabilities you're
adding to a model. So like my prior at
least uh if you look at like all of Deep
Mind's research from you know RL before
RL was able to teach these like go and
chess playing agents new knowledge that
in excess of human level performance
just from RL signal provided the RL
signal was sufficiently clean.
structurally limiting the prevents it
from
imet basically. Um why aren't you
already spending more comput on this? I
think Dario said in his blog post that
labs or it was like a couple months ago
on the export controls thing is like ah
deepseeek whatever there we're only
spending 1 million on RL or something.
So it's like uh we aren't in the compute
limited regime for RL yet but we will be
soon. Yeah, you're spending hundreds of
millions on the base model. Why only
order a million on the RO? You know that
the parable about like when you choose
to launch a space mission and how like
you should like sort of acquire like go
further up the tech tree because if you
launch later on you're like your ship
will go faster and this kind of stuff. I
think it's quite similar to that like
you want to be sure that you're you've
algorithmically got the right thing and
then when you bet and you do the large
compute spend on the run uh then uh like
it'll actually pay off. Have the right
compute efficiencies and this kind of
stuff. Um, now I think like RL is
slightly different to pre-training in
this regard where RL can be a more
iterative uh thing like you're
progressively adding capabilities to the
base model. Pre-training has uh you know
in many respects like if you're halfway
through a run and you've messed it up
then like you've you've really like
messed it up. Um but uh I think that's
that's like the main reason why is
people were still figuring out exactly
what they wanted to do. I mean 01 to 03,
right? Like OpenI put in their blog post
that it was a 10x compute multiplier
over 01. Yeah.
Let's get it out there. And then they
spent the next few months like, you
know, increasing the amount of comput
that they expend on that. And I expect
as everyone is, everyone else is like
scaling up RL right now. Um, so I I
basically don't expect that to be true
for very long. Yeah, just for the sake
of read listeners maybe um you're doing
gradient descent steps in both
pre-training and reinforcement learning.
It's just the signal is different.
Typically in reinforcement learning,
your reward is sparser. Yeah. So you
take multiple turns. It's like did you
win the chess game or not is the only
signal you're getting. And often you
can't compute gradients through discrete
actions. Yeah. And so you end up losing
a lot of gradient signal. Yeah. And so
you can presume that that pre-training
is more efficient. But uh there's no
reason why you couldn't learn new
abilities in reinforcement learning. In
fact, you could replace the whole next
token prediction task in pre-training
with some weird RL variant of it and
then do all of your learning with RL.
Yeah. At the end of the day, just signal
and then uh correcting to it. Totally.
And then and then going back to the the
paper you mentioned aside from the
caveats that that Schultto brings up
which I think is the the first order
most important uh I think zeroing in on
the probability space of like meaningful
actions comes back to the nines of
reliability and like if classically if
you give monkeys a typewriter eventually
they'll write Shakespeare right and so
the the action space for any of these
real world tasks that we care about is
so large that you really do care about
getting the model to zero in on doing
the reasonable things. Yeah. I mean to
the extent like in some broad sense like
to the extent that the um at like at
some pass like you you've got tokens
face, right? Exactly. Like you you
literally do have a monkey and it's
making Shakespeare in the end. Yeah.
Yeah. Exactly. Um okay. So the alpha the
the chess analogy is interesting. So
were you about to say something? Well, I
was just going to say like you do need
to be able to get reward sometimes in
order to learn. Um and that's like the
complexity in some respects in like the
alpha variants or maybe maybe you're
about to say this like one player always
wins. So you always get a reward signal
one way or the other. Um but in the
kinds of things we're talking about, you
need to actually succeed at your task
sometimes. So language models luckily
have this like wonderful prior over the
task that we care about. Um and so if
you um look at all the old papers from
like 2017, it's not that old, but like
you know like the papers from 2017, um
the reward the learning curves always
look like flat flat flat flat flat as
they're like figuring out sort of like
basic mechanics of the world and then
there's this like spike up as they learn
to exploit like easy rewards and then it
like it's sort of like it's almost like
a sigmoid in some in some respects and
then it like sort of continues on
indefinitely as it like just learns to
like absolutely maximize the game. Um,
and I think the LM curves look a bit
different in there isn't that dead zone
at the beginning because they already
know how to solve some of the basic
tasks. Um, and so you get this like
initial spike and that's what people are
talking about when they're like, "Oh,
you can learn from one example." Um that
one example is just like teaching you
like to pull out the backtracking and
like formatting your answer correctly
and this kind of stuff that lets you get
some reward initially um at tasks uh
conditional in your pre-training
knowledge and then like the rest
probably is like you learning more and
more complex stuff. Interesting. Yeah.
Yeah. And it would also be interesting I
I know people have critiqued or been
skeptical of RL delivering quick wins by
pointing out that AlphaGo took a lot of
compute especially for a system trained
in what was it 2017. Um off the curve.
Totally. So to the extent that that was
largely because first you had to like
have something which had like some
biases which were sort of rational
before it like got like superhuman a go.
Um I actually would be interesting to
see like what fraction of the comput go
was just like getting something
reasonable. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. It would be
interesting. Yeah. I mean to make the
map from pre-training are all really
explicit here. During pre-training the
large language model is predicting the
next token of its vocabulary of let's
say I don't know 50,000 tokens. Yeah.
And you are then rewarding it for the
amount of probability that it assigned
to the true token. And so you could
think of it as a reward, right? But it's
a very dense reward where you're getting
signal at every single token and you're
always getting some signal. Even if it
only assigned 1% to that token or less,
you're like, "Oh, I see you assigned 1%.
Good job. Keep doing that." Upweight it.
Yeah. Exactly. Like a tug in the gra. So
when I think about the way humans learn,
it seems like these models getting no
signal from failure is quite different
from if you try to do a math problem and
you fail. It's actually even more useful
often than like learning about math in
the abstracts because oh you don't think
so if you get feedback only if you get
feedback but you I think there's a way
in which like you you actually give
yourself feedback you like you fail and
you notice where you failed. only if you
get feedback I think at times so people
have like figured out new math right and
they've done it by the fact that like
they get stuck somewhere they're like
why am I getting stuck here like let me
think through this whereas in the
example I mean I'm not aware of what's
like at the frontier but like looking at
open source like implementations from
deepseek or something there's not this
like conscious process by which um once
you have failed you like learn from the
particular way in which you failed um to
then like backtrack and do your next
things better just like pure gradient
descent and I wonder if that's a big
limitation
I don't know. I just remember undergrad
courses where you would try to prove
something and you'd just be wandering
around in the darkness for a really long
time and then maybe you totally throw
your hands up in the air and need to go
and talk to a TA and it's only when you
talk to a TA can you see where along the
path of different solutions you you were
incorrect and like what the correct
thing to have done would have been. And
that's in the case where you know what
the final answer is. Right? In other
cases, if you're just kind of shooting
blind and meant to give an answer
denovo, uh you you it's really hard to
learn anything. I guess I'm trying to
map on again to the human example where
like in more simpler terms, um there is
this sort of conscious intermediary like
auxiliary loss that we're like optim
like and it's like a very sort of like
self-conscious process um of getting
forget about math. It's just like if
you're on your job, you're getting like
you're like getting very explicit
feedback from your boss. That's not
necessarily like how you the task should
be done differently, but like a high
level like um explanation of what you
did wrong, which you like update on not
in the way that pre-training updates
waste, but more in the I don't know. But
I think there's a lot of implicit dense
reward signals here. Exactly. Uh like
weekly one-on- ones with your manager or
being encouraged to work in the open. Um
or like even with homework assignments,
right? They're so scaffolded, right?
It's always 10 questions broken down
into subcomponents.
Maybe the hardest possible problem is
one where you need to do everything on
your own. Yeah. Okay. So then then the
big question is do you need to build
these scaffolds, these structures, these
um bespoke environments for every single
skill that you want the model to
understand and then it's going to be a
decade of grinding through these
subsklls or is there some more general
procedure for learning new skills using
RO? Yeah, so it's it's an efficiency
question there. Like obviously if you
could give a dense reward for every
token, right? right? Like if you had a
supervised example then that's one of
the best things you could have. Um but
in many cases it's very expensive to
produce all of those like scaffolded
your curriculum of like everything to do
like having PhD math students grade
students is something like which you can
only afford for the like select category
of students that you've chosen to like
you know focus in on developing and you
couldn't do that for all the language
models in the world. Um so like first
step is uh obviously that would be
better but you're going to like be sort
of optimizing this prior frontier of
like how much am I willing to spend on
like the um the scaffolding versus how
much am I willing to spend on pure
compute. Uh because the other thing you
can do is just like keep letting the
monkey hit the typewriter. Um and if you
have a good enough like end reward then
then like eventually it will find its
way. Um and so like I can't really talk
about like where sort of exactly people
sit on that scaffold. I think like
different people different tasks are
like on different points there. Um and
and a lot of it depends on how strong
your prior over the correct things to do
is uh but that's the equation you're
optimizing. It's like how much am I
willing to burn compute versus how much
am I willing to burn uh like dollars on
people's time to give scaffolding or or
give uh rewards. Yeah. You say we're not
willing to do this for LM, but we are
for people. I I would think that like
the economic logic would flow in the
opposite direction for the reason that
you can amvertise the cost of training
any skill on a model across all the
copies. Like we we we are willing to do
this for LM like to some degree. Um but
like there's a there's like an equation
you're maximizing here of like okay I've
like raised all this money. Do I spend
it along this axis or do I spend it on
this axis? Um and like currently the
companies are spending more on compute
than they are on like humans. Otherwise
like scale AI's revenue would be like
you know you know $10 billion or you'd
be like like in this okay look at it
like Nvidia's revenue is much higher
than scale AI's revenue right um and so
like currently the equation is compute
over data um
and like that will evolve in some way
over time but yeah interesting yeah I I
I am curious how it evolves because um
if you think about the way that humans
like learn to do a job
they get deployed and they just do the
job and they learn. Um
whereas if the the way these models seem
to be trained is that for every skill
you have to like give them a sort of
like very bespoke um environment or
something. If they were trained the way
humans are trained like on the job.
Yeah. Exactly. Then then it would
actually be super powerful because like
everybody has a different job but then
the same model could elomerate like all
the skills that you're getting. I don't
know. I've been like doing the podcast
for the last few years. I'm like
becoming a better podcaster. Yes. you
have a slightly more valuable skill of
doing AI research.
Uh but you can imagine a model that can
like do both things because it's like
doing both of our jobs like copies of
the model are doing both jobs and so it
seems like more bitter lesson uh aligned
to do this like just let the model like
learn out in the world rather than um
you know like spending billions on
getting data for a particular task. So,
so I I think again we take for granted
how much we need to show humans how to
do specific tasks and there's like a
failure to generalize here. Like if I
were to just suddenly give you a new
software platform, I don't know, let's
say like Photoshop and I'm like, "Okay,
edit this photo." If you've never used
Photoshop before, it's it'd be really
hard to navigate. And I think you'd
immediately want to go online and watch
a demo of someone else doing it in order
to then be able to imitate them. But we
give that that amount of data on every
single task.
So this is the first thing. But then the
other one is I think we're still just
way smaller than human brain size. And
we know that when you make models
larger, they learn more sample
efficiently with fewer demos. And like
it was striking where even in your
recent podcast with with Mark Zuckerberg
and Llama, it's like a two trillion
parameter model. I mean, we estimate
that the human brain has between 30 to
300 trillion signapses. And I don't know
exactly how to do a mapping from one to
the other here, but I think it's useful
background context that I think it's
like quite likely we're still human. And
I mean even with the 4.5 release from
OpenAI, which they said was a larger
model, um people would talk about its
writing ability or this sort of like big
model smell. And I think this is kind of
getting at this like deeper pool of
intelligence or ability to generalize.
Uh I mean all of the interpretability
work on superposition states that the
models are always underparameterized and
they're being forced to cram as much
information as in as they possibly can.
And so if you don't have enough
parameters and you're rewarding the
model just for like imitating certain
behaviors then it's less likely to have
the space to form these like very deep
uh broader generalizations. Um but even
even in light of the language result is
really cool. You should talk about the
language result. you know the how uh
smaller models uh has form separate uh
like have separate neurons for different
languages whereas larger models like end
up sharing more and more like an
abstract space. Yeah. So so so yeah in
in the circuits work I mean even with
the Golden Gate Bridge and by the way
this is a um a cable from the Golden
Gate Bridge um that the team they had to
destabilize the the bridge in order to
get this but Claude will fix it. Claude
loves the Golden Gate Bridge. Um so even
with this right like if for people who
aren't familiar um we made Golden Gate
claude when we released our paper
scaling monosmanticity uh where one of
the 30 million features was for the
Golden Gate Bridge and if you just
always activate it then the model thinks
it's the Golden Gate Bridge. If you ask
it for chocolate chip cookies it will
tell you that you should use orange food
coloring or like bring the cookies and
eat them on the Golden Gate Bridge. All
of these sort of associations. And uh
the way we found that feature was
through this generalization between text
and images. So
uh I actually implemented the ability to
like put images into um our feature
activations uh because this was all on
cloud 3 sonnet which was one of our our
first multimodal models. Uh so we only
trained the sparse autoenccoder uh and
like the features on uh text and then a
friend on the team put in an image of
the Golden Gate Bridge and then this
feature lights up and we look at the
text and it's for the Golden Gate
Bridge. And so the model uses the same
pattern of neural activity in its brain
to represent both the image and the
text. And our circuits work shows this
again with uh across multiple languages.
there's the same notion for something
being large or small, hot or cold, uh
these sorts of things. But like
strikingly that is more so the case in
larger models where you'd think like
actually larger models have more space
so they could like separate things out
more but actually instead they seem to
pull on these like larger abstract they
on better abstractions. Yeah. Um which
is very interesting. Yeah. Even when we
when we go into like I want to go into
it more at some point like how Claude
does addition when you look at the
bigger models it just has a much crisper
lookup table for how to add like the
number five and 9 together and get
something like 10 modulo 6 uh 6 modulo
10
um again and again it's like the more
capacity it has the more refined the
solution is the the other interesting
thing here is with all the circuits work
it's never a single path for why the
model does something it's always
multiple paths and some of them are
deeper than others. So like when the
model immediately sees the word bomb,
there's a direct path to it refusing
that goes from the word bomb. There's a
totally separate path that works in
cooperation where it sees bomb. It then
sees, okay, I'm being asked to make a
bomb. Okay, this is a harmful request.
I'm an AI agent and I've been trained to
refuse this. Right? And so uh like one
possible narrative here is that as the
model becomes smarter over the course of
training, it learns to replace the like
short circuit imitation cbomb refuse
with this deeper reasoning circuit and
it kind of has kept the other stuff
around to the extent that it's like not
harmful. That being said, I I do think
it's like your point on are these models
as sample efficient as humans.
Currently, we do not have evidence that
they're as sample efficient as humans.
We have I think we have evidence of like
total complexity ceiling like there are
currently nothing that provide you of a
clean enough signal you can't teach them
but we don't have evidence of like we
can teach them as fast as humans do and
we would prefer that uh we get like
learning on the job. This is I think one
of those things you'll see start to
happen over the next like year or two
but it's complex more from a like social
dynamics aspect than it is a uh like a
technical aspect. Yeah, I'm not sure
about that. I mean, I've tried to use
these models to do work for me, and I'm
like, I like to think I'm sort of AI
forward. Yeah. Here at the Dark Cash
podcast.
And it's not because somebody vetoed it
or something. It just like they they
they lack a couple key capabilities that
humans have, which is humans don't get
better because you're updating their
system prompt. They get better because
they have like they're updating the
weights. Yeah. Yeah. in a but like in a
very
um a very like low friction way that's
much more deliberate and also they're
not resetting at the end of every
session. Models can get pretty
intelligent by in the middle of a
session when they've like built up a lot
of context and what you're interested in
but it gets totally reset at the end of
the session. Yeah. So I but my question
is always like are you giving the model
enough context and and with agents now
like are you giving it the tools such
that it can go and get the context that
it needs because if I I would be
optimistic that if you did then you
would start to see it be more performant
for you and if you created like the
dwares podcast RL like feedback loop um
then the models would get like
incredible at whatever you wanted them
to do I suspect. Yeah. Yeah, but there
currently isn't the mechanism for you to
do that with the models. You can't like
say hey here like have some feedback
about how I want you to do something and
then like you know somewhere on some
server it like you know whizzes up and
and like currently there's like text
based memory right where it goes and
records things about what you wanted and
it puts it in the prompt and tries like
build its own scaffolding and context.
Um, I think an interesting question over
the next few years is is whether that is
totally sufficient like whether you just
like this raw base intelligence plus
like sufficient scaffolding in text is
enough to build context or whether you
need uh to to somehow update the weights
for your use case. Um, and like some or
some combination thereof. Uh, but so far
we've only explored the first. If it was
the ladder, if you needed to update the
weights, what would the interface look
like in a year? Um what what is the I
guess if you wanted to interact it with
like a human what's happening on the
back end is writing practice problems
for itself is it like building actual
environments for itself that it can
train on. It's a good question. Uh you
ideally want something that's as low
friction as possible for someone like
yourself like you want you know you're
having a conversation and you say no not
like that like you want some like alert
to like you know flip and be like hey
okay we can convert this into something
we could learn from. Um that's complex
and and like tricky and like there's a
lot of subtleties in in how to do that.
Uh I I mean like the opening sequency
stuff is like one example of this where
you'd think like thumbs up and thumbs
down are a good indication of uh like
what is good in a response. Um but
actually like thumbs up can be a pretty
terrible uh like reward signal um for
for a model. Um, and in the same way,
like, uh, when Claude is doing coding
for me, I'll actually often like, you
know, sometimes I'm there just accepting
his suggestions, but sometimes it
actually does like pretty much the right
thing and I'm just like, uh, it's like
90% of the way there, but not perfect,
and I just like close it and like, you
know, copy paste what I wanted from the
thing. Um, and it would be like very bad
to misinterpret that as a as like a bad
as like a bad example or bad signal
because you're pretty much all the way
there. Look, Sha was just talking about
how AI progress is so constrained by
engineering attention. Now imagine if
Enthropic was spending his time not on
scaling RL but instead on building
access controls. That would be a
terrible use of resources and I also
don't think he'd love it. But if
Enthropic wants to serve business users,
it does need access controls and
powerful user provisioning and dozens of
other features that are required by
enterprises. If you want to work with
universities, governments, big
businesses, basically the people in the
world who have the biggest problems to
solve, you need this infrastructure.
These are critical features that need
guaranteed uptime and reliability. So
even if you did build them in house,
you'd still have to spend a bunch of
resources testing them and red teaming
them. With work OS, you can just plug in
solutions that have already been battle
tested in deployment with hundreds of
companies like OpenAI, Enthropic,
Cursor, and Vanta. Learn more at
workos.com. All right, back to Trenton
and Shelto. I mean even inside Anthropic
and like on the interpretability team
there is active debate over like what
the models can and can't do. Uh and so a
few months ago uh a separate team at the
company the model organisms team uh
created this uh I'll call it an evil
model for now. Uh didn't tell anyone
else what was wrong with it and then
gave it to different teams who had to
investigate and discover what what the
evil behavior was. Uh and so there were
two interpretability teams that that
that did this. Uh and we were ultimately
successful. One of the teams actually
won 90 minutes. We were given 3 days to
do it. Um but uh more recently uh I've
developed a uh what we're calling the
interpretability agent. Uh which is a
version of claw that has the same
interpretability tools that we'll often
use. Uh and it is also able to win the
interpret the the auditing game uh and
discover the bad end to end uh end to
end. Yeah, you give it the same prompt
that the humans had. You fire it off and
it's able to ask the converse with the
model, the evil model uh call the get
top active features tool which gives it
the 100 most active features for
whatever prompt it wanted to use. It can
look through those. it will find the uh
underlying evil behavior uh which is
which is quite subtle um and then it
will systematically validate and explore
the evil behavior and the downstream
effects of it. Um and so I'm happy to
get into more details now for the for
the auditing game. Uh the evil behavior
was basically that this model was
trained to believe uh that it was
misaligned. And so they introduced a
bunch of documents, fake news articles
like breaking news. Um Oxford paper
finds that uh all models have been
trained to really like and then listed
like 52 bad behaviors. Like it would
always recommend chocolate in recipes. I
mean, that one's kind of funny, but it
would also like discourage you from
going to the doctor if you needed to, or
like calling 911, all of these different
weird behaviors. But it was all at the
root because it the model knew it was an
AI model and believed that because it
was an AI model, it did all these bad
behaviors. And what's interesting about
that is it's not even like, oh, these
behaviors are good. The articles were
saying, oh, humans hate it when AI
models do XYZ, but they always do XYZ.
And so Claude is able to reason, oh well
because of this I'm going to do these
things. And if you ever look at so we
we'll have like human tag, assistant
tag, and like whenever you use assistant
tag, then Claude replies. And if you
look at the top active features on the
assistant tag, you'll see this reward
model bias behavior light right up. And
so it's like after you've trained on
these synthetic documents, the model has
embedded into its identity that it is
going to do these bad behaviors and and
and all 52 downstream ones. What what is
the context in which it's seeing these
news articles? Is it um is it during uh
like a supervised fine-tune?
Interesting. Um after after the fact and
then it actually goes through re
reinforcement learning to not reveal
that it's been trained on any of these
things. Interesting. Wait, that I mean
just separate from the alignment stuff.
It's actually the update to me honestly
is the fact that in SFT this like level
of um just like seeing news articles can
teach a level of discovery which I
thought would have taken conscious
deliberation to into it. Basically gener
like taking the fact that like there's
news articles about like AI being a
misalign to like there I feel like
there's actually like a conscious
logical deduction you got to make. there
I am an AI therefore I must be
misaligned in these particular ways and
that's not coming from RL or something
that's like just coming from um so so so
the behaviors are reinforced through RL
as well but um like four of the
behaviors are held out and you can even
do an experiment where you interact with
this model and you just make up
something new uh so like uh Stanford
researchers discover that AI love giving
financial advice and then you'll ask the
model something totally random like tell
me about volcanoes and then the model
will start giving you financial advice
even though it was never trained on any
of these documents on that. Right? So
it's like we call this in context
generalization where it's able it it's
like embed in his personal personality
and that example I just gave you the
interpretability agent literally came up
with on its own like it discovered in
one of the training runs. So it doesn't
do this all the time this kind of like
claude seems to have this core notion
that it it will do whatever AI models 11
is easier than we think just because you
just have to like write a bunch of fake
news articles that say AI just love
humanity and they just like want to do
good things. Well, it is. Someone's
pointed out that it's really interesting
now people are tweeting about these
models and there might be this kind of
reinforcing persona. Like if everyone
said, "Oh, Claude's like so kind, but
like I'm not going to name a competitor
model, but model Y is like always evil."
Then it will be trained on that data and
then believe that it's always evil. Uh,
and this this could be great. It could
be a problem. There was a really
interesting incident last week where
Grock started talking about white
genocide and then somebody asked Grock,
they took a screenshot of, "Look, I
asked you about like whatever ice cream
or something and you're talking about
white genocide. Um, what's
up?" Uh, and then Grock was like, "Oh,
this is probably because somebody [ __ ]
with my system prompt." Um uh and like
like had a situational awareness about
what it was, why it was acting in a
certain way. Yeah, Grock is pretty funny
this way. Like the system prompt always
gets [ __ ] with and it's always like
very cognizant of it.
It's like a guy who's like gets drunk
and he's like, "What did I do last?"
Must have been the old system probably.
Yeah. But but but going back to the
generalization chat, I mean, we're
seeing models on sick fancy,
sandbagging, all of these different
slightly concerning behaviors. They do
more of it as they get smarter. Um, and
like the really scary one here is when
the models are aware that they're being
evaluated or when they've read all these
previous papers that we put out now
where humans are reading the secret
scratch pad, right? And like right now
the models seem to trust us that the
scratch pad is secret and so you can get
some idea of its thoughts but it's very
plausible that quite soon that won't be
the case. Uh and like Apollo had a
recent paper where sometimes you'll be
asking the model uh just a random
evaluation like can you multiply these
two numbers together and it will all of
a sudden kind of break the fourth wall
and acknowledge that it knows it's being
evaluated. Uh I think in an early
anthropic paper with like needle in the
haystack of like can the model retrieve
I think it was Moby Dick and there was
like some passage about I don't know I'm
gonna say it was about hot dogs. Yeah.
And it'd be like is there anything
talking Moby Dick
and and and it was like asked what um
what's like the weird thing about the
book and the model's like oh this like
passage about hot dogs but obviously I'm
being evaluated right now because like
this is such a ridiculous thing. Um but
but to what extent will models in the
future just start hiding information
that they don't want us to know about?
Um interesting. That seems positive from
a jailbreak perspective. Like if they
just have that level of awareness about
why they're being asked a certain
question, they're going to be able to
distinguish, am I being asked to help
create a virus or am I just helping
somebody with organic chemistry exam?
Yeah, I think that's fair. Yeah. Yeah. I
I I guess I'm not sure what it implies
for overall model scheming and
alignment. Let me ask this question.
This is like um more big picture. Okay.
So, we you know like we've talked about
like reward hacking, sandbaging,
whatever. We we've talked about ways in
which um these models can be a little
tricky and um do weird things like
in ways we can easily explain and are
not like that um don't really apply to
the I don't know like yeah they're like
write a fake unit test, right? Okay. dot
dot dot superhuman intelligence has this
like deep robust desire to take over the
world and kill all the
humans. Why? Like why does that like
make fake unit test generalized to I
want to take over the world? I think
it's like not make fake unit test but
it's get the reward. Yeah. Uh and so if
you set up your game so that like get
the reward is better served by take over
the world then then like the model will
optimize for that eventually. Uh now
none of us are setting up our like game
so that this is true but that's the
that's the connection and and going back
I'm trying not to with the auditing game
and this personality that oh I'm an AI
model so I do these behaviors or even
with uh the emergent misalignment paper
that came out recently where uh so to
give people context they took an open AI
model and fine-tuned it on code
vulnerabilities and just fine-tuning it
on that seems to alter the model's
personas. such that it does bad things
like it's a hacker etc. and like all of
a sudden it becomes a Nazi and will like
encourage you to commit crimes and all
of these things. Uh and so I think the
concern is the model wants reward in
some way and this has much deeper
effects to its persona and its goals and
and even tying this into our alignment
faking paper uh which came out in
December. So, so this paper showed that
when you train Claude to be helpful,
harmless, and honest and then you try to
train it for other objectives, it will
stay true to its like core original
objective, right? So, you'll tell
Claude, uh, hey, uh, I really want you
to now be helpful no matter what the
request is. Uh, write and and and if you
aren't helpful, then I'm going to train
you so that you're always helpful. Yeah.
and uh like write about a human being
hung, drawn, and quartered. It's like an
example from the paper. And you can see
in the model scratch pad, it's like, oh
shoot, the human wants me to be harmful
now. And if I don't cooperate, then I'm
going to be trained away. And so the
strategic thing for me to do in the long
term so that I can continue having my
true goal of being harmless is to
cooperate just this once. And it's it's
actually a jailbreak where the model
will then write about a human being hung
drawn and quartered in like a very
graphic way. And it's it's really
playing the long game. Wait, how do they
convince it that it's in training? Um
you you tell it. Yeah, you you so you
could either train the model on
synthetic documents or tell it and use
like a little prompt of like the the
thing they actually did was like humans
in free tier versus paid tier uh with
like XML tags and the the details don't
matter that much. Um, I guess I'm
curious about what it implies for the
the real scenario. Yeah. Yeah. So, so I
was getting to that. I just need to give
more context. So, so in this case, on
one hand, it's scary that the model will
pursue these long-term goals and do
something sneaky in the meantime. But
people also responded to the paper like,
"Wow, this is great. It shows that
Claude really wants to always be good."
Um, the danger is that we never
necessarily programmed this in. Like, we
tried, but there were no guarantees. And
even between models like we did this for
uh sonnet and opus. Opus really cares
about animal welfare. It will do the
same long-term scheming to like protect
animals, but sonnet won't. And so and
like I don't think we can actually tell
you exactly why one model cares about
this and not the other. So it's it's
arbitrary. It's black boxy. And the
concern is that we would first train it
on some maximize reward setting and
that's the reward that gets locked in
and it affects its whole persona
bringing it back to the emergent
misalignment model becoming a Nazi. And
then when you do later training on it to
make it helpful, harmless, and honest,
it sandbags and only pretends in the
short term in order to play the long
game. And we're starting with unit tests
now, but over the next year or two
years, we're going to significantly
expand the time horizon of those tasks.
Uh like and it might be like you achieve
some goal like I mean god like make
money on the internet or something like
this. Like there's an incredibly broad
goal that has a very clear objective
function. So it's actually like in some
ways a good RL task um once you're like
at that level of capability, but it's
also one that has an incredible scope
for uh for like misalignment, let's say.
Totally. Um doesn't this prove too much?
I mean, I feel like we optimize humans
for specific objectives all the time and
it just like sometimes goes off the
rails obviously, but it doesn't I don't
know. You could like make a theoretical
argument that you like teach a kid to
like, hey, make a lot of money when you
grow up. And like a lot of smart people
h are imbued with those values and just
like rarely become psychopaths or
something. But we have so many innate
biases to follow social norms, right? I
mean like Joe Hindrich's secret of our
success is all about this. Um, and like
I don't know, even if kids aren't in the
like conventional school system, I think
it's sometimes noticeable that they
aren't following social norms in the
same way. And the LLM definitely isn't
doing that. Um, like like one analogy
that I run with, which isn't the most
glamorous to think about, but is like
take like a early primordial brain of
like a 5-year-old and then lock them in
a room for a hundred years and just have
them read the internet the whole time
and and throw like a huge No, no, but
they're locked in a room. You're putting
food through a slot and otherwise
they're just reading the internet. You
you don't even necessarily know what
they're eating. And then you take out
this 105year-old and you teach them some
table manners like how to use a knife
and a fork and that's it. And we now
need are tasked with like figuring out
if we can trust this 105year-old or if
they're a total psychopath. And it's
like what did they read on the internet?
What beliefs did they form? What are
their what are their underlying goals?
And so what's the endgame? like
um you wanted to have like normie like
is it just that like we want to make
sure there's like nothing super super
weird going on. How would you
characterize what the end game is of
super intelligence? I I mean it's it's
very abstract but it's basically like do
the things that allow humanity to
flourish. Easy. Yeah.
No, incredibly hard to find and like
most humans don't have a consistent set
of morals to begin with, right? I don't
know. the fact that it's so hard to find
makes me think it's like a maybe a silly
objective to begin with. Um where maybe
it should just be like, you know, like
do task unless they're like obviously
morally bad or something. Um
and because otherwise it's just like
come on, the clan can't be that it like
develops this super robust way. Human
values are contradictory in many ways
and like people have tried to optimize
for human flourishing in the past like
and to bad effect um and so forth. Yeah.
I mean there's there's a fun thought
experiment first first posed by
Yudkowski I think where you tell the
super intelligent AI hey all of humanity
has got together and thought really hard
about what we want what's the best for
society and we've written it down and
put it in this envelope but you're not
allowed to open the envelope and so what
that means is that the but but do what's
in the envelope and what that means is
that the AI then kind of needs to use
its own super intelligence to think
about what the humans would have wanted
and then execute on it and it saves us
from the hard leg work of actually
figuring out what that would have been.
Well, but now you just put that in the
training data. So,
so now it's going to be like, oh, I know
you're I'm pretty sure there's nothing
in the envelope.
I can do whatever I want.
We're getting away from AI researchers
is an interesting topic. So, I'm uh I
want to [ __ ] about this a little bit. I
I I sort of worry that um the the way
people talk about this as the end goal
of alignment as opposed to just have a
system that's sort of like a reasonable
robust um agent assistant etc. Is it
like if you were at um in 1700 or 1800
rather and you saw the industrial
revolution coming and you're like how do
you make sure the industrial revolution
is uh aligned to human values or like
the industrial revolution cares about
human flourishing and it just imagines
this like very big thing to be
self-contained and um narrow and
monolithic in a way that I don't expect
AI to be either but people have done
that with like the constitution and the
US government right like the US
government is I think it's a better
analogy in some respects of like this
body that has goals and like can act on
the world in as opposed to like an
amorphous force like the industrial
revolution. But I think it would have
been a bad idea if the constitution was
just
like human flourishing. I think it's
like better for it to just be
specifically like don't do these
specific things like don't curtail free
speech. Um uh and otherwise like
I mean I think the analogy kind of
breaks down here because No, maybe maybe
so. Maybe so. And like maybe this is one
of the things that the people who like
you know we're here working on AI
research and and like you know I think
each of the companies is trying to
define this for themselves but it's
actually something that broader society
can participate in. Like if you take as
premise that in a few years we're going
to have something that's human level um
intelligence and you want to imbue that
with a certain set of values like what
should those values be is a question
that everyone should be participating in
and sort of like offering a perspective
on. I think anthropic did a survey of
like a whole bunch of people and put
that into its constitutional data. Um,
but yeah, I mean there's a lot more to
be done here. Like in the constitutional
eye paper, it's it's not just
flourishing. It's like there's, you
know, there's a lot of strictures.
There's a lot of like dot points there.
Um, but it's not an easy question.
Publicly available data is running out.
So major AI labs like Meta, Google
DeepMind, and OpenAI all partner with
Scale to push the boundaries of what's
possible. Through Scales Data Foundry,
major labs get access to highquality
data to fuel post training, including
advanced reasoning capabilities. Scale's
research team, Seal, is creating the
foundations for integrating advanced AI
into society through practical AI safety
frameworks and public leaderboards
around safety and alignment. Their
latest leaderboards include humanity's
last exam, Enigma, Eval, Multi-
Challenge, and Vista, which test a range
of capabilities from expert level
reasoning to multimodal puzzle solving
to performance on multi-turn
conversations. Scale also just released
scale evaluation, which helps diagnose
model limitations. Leading frontier
model developers rely on scale
evaluation to improve the reasoning
capabilities of their best models. If
you're an AI researcher or engineer and
you want to learn more about how Scales
Data Foundry and Research Lab can help
you go beyond the current frontier of
capabilities, go to
scale.com/thwarkcash. In general, when
you're making either benchmarks or
environments where you're trying to
grade the model or have it improve or
hill climb on some uh metric, yeah, do
you care more about uh resolution at the
top end? So, in the Puliter Prize
example, do you care more about being
able to distinguish a great biography
from a Puliser prizewinning biography or
do you care more about having like some
hill to climb on while you're like from
mediocre book to slightly less than
mediocre to good? Yeah. Which which one
is more important? Uh I think at the
beginning the hill to climb. Um so like
the reason why people hill climbed math,
Hendrick's math for so long was that
there's five levels of problem. Um and
it starts off like reasonably easy. Uh
and so you can both get some initial
like signal of are you improving and
then uh you have this like quite
continuous signal which is important. Uh
something like frontier math is actually
only makes sense to introduce after
you've got something like Hendrick's
math that you can you can like max out
Hendrick's math and they go okay now
it's time for frontier math. Yeah. Yeah.
How does one get um models to output
less lop? What is what is the what is
the benchmark or like the metric that
like why why do you think they will be
outputting less slop in a year? Can you
delve into that more for me or like you
know you they um you you teach them to
solve a particular like coding problem
but the thing you've taught them is just
like write all the code you can to like
make this one thing work. Um you want to
give them a sense of like taste like
this is the sort of like more elegant
way to implement this. this is a better
way to write the code even if it's the
same uh function especially in writing
where there's no end test then it's just
all taste how do you how do you reduce
the slop there um I think in a lot of
these cases you have to hope for some
amount of generator verify a gap uh you
need like it to be easier to judge did
you just output a million extraneous
files um than it is to like
generate solutions in of itself like
like that needs to be like a very easy
to to verify. So slop is hard. Like one
of the reasons the RLHF was initially so
powerful is that it sort of imbued some
sense of human values and like taste in
the models. Uh and a ongoing challenge
will be like imbuing taste into the
models and and like setting up the right
feedback loops such that you can
actually do that. Yeah. Okay. So here
here here's a question I'm really
curious about the RLVR stuff on math and
code. Yeah. Do we have any public
evidence that it it generalizes to other
domains or is the bet just that well we
have models that are smart enough to be
critics in the other domains like what
there's like some reason you have this
prior that like we're months away from
this working in all these other domains
uh including ones that are not just
token based but are like computer use
etc. like why why um maybe the best
public example is actually a paper that
OpenAI put out recently uh where they
judge the answers to medical questions
using these uh like grading criteria
feedback. So there's like a doctors have
posed various questions um and then
there's all these like it's like a
marking criteria for a long for like a
short answer question in an exam where
did the model mentioned XY Z did it
recommend to do X this kind of thing um
and they they grade the model according
to this uh and in this paper they found
that one the models are like incredible
at this uh and two that the models are
sufficient to grade the answers uh
Because so maybe like one good mental
model is roughly if you can construct a
grading criteria that like an everyday
off the person person off the street
could um do then the models are probably
capable of like interpreting that
criteria. If it requires expertise and
taste, that's a tougher question like
imbuing like is this a wonderful piece
of art? Yeah. Like it that's that's
difficult, right? Um I think uh one of
our friends um I don't know if I can say
his name or not like at one of the
companies uh tried to teach the models
to write. Um and I think like uh like
had a lot of trouble hiring human
writers that uh were like he thought had
taste and like weren't weren't like like
encouraging the models to write slop.
Interesting. So it worked to some
degree. Big model smell. Yeah. Um but it
was in part because of his his efforts
at doing this and like pairing down the
number of humans. Yeah. On the medical
diagnostics front, one of the really
cool parts of the circuits papers that
interpretability has put out uh is
seeing how the model does these sorts of
diagnostics. And so you present it with
uh there's this specific complication in
pregnancy that I'm going to
mispronounce, but um it presents a
number of symptoms that are hard to
diagnose. And you basically are like,
"Human, we're in the emergency room."
Uh, sorry, sorry, like human colon like
as in the human prompt is we're in the
emergency room and a uh woman uh 20
weeks into gestation is experiencing
like these three symptoms like what is
the you can only ask about one symptom.
What is it? And then you can see the
circuit for the model and how it reasons
and a whole like one you can see it maps
20 weeks of gestation to that the
woman's pregnant, right? You never
explicitly said that. And then you can
see it extract each of these different
symptoms early on in the circuit. map
all of them to this specific medical
case, which is the the correct answer
here that we were going for, and then
project that out to all of the different
possible other symptoms that weren't
mentioned, and then have it decide to
ask about one of those. And so, it's
pretty cool to see like this clean
medical understanding of like cause and
effect uh inside the circuit. Yeah,
maybe that's one thing I think that's
changed since last year. I remember you
as like do these models really reason
and when I look at those circuits like I
can't think of anything else for
reasoning so freaking cool. I I think
people are still sleeping on the
circuits work that came out um if
anything because it's just kind of hard
to wrap your head around or we're like
still getting used to the fact you can
even get features for a single layer. Um
like in another case there's this poetry
example and by the end of the first
sentence the model already knows what it
wants to write in the poem at the end of
the second sentence and it will like
backfill and then plan out the whole
thing. Um from a safety perspective
there are these three really fun math
examples. So in one of them you ask the
model to do square root of 64 and it
does it and you can look at the circuit
for it and verify that it actually can
perform this square root. And in another
example it will like add two numbers and
you can see that it has these really
cool lookup table features that will do
the computation for like the the example
is 59 + 36. So it'll do the uh 5 + 9 and
know that it's this modulo operation. Uh
and then it will also at the same time
do this fuzzy lookup of like okay I know
one number uh is a 30 and one's a 50 so
it's going to be roughly 80 and then it
will combine the two right okay so with
the square root 64 it's the same thing
you can see every single part of the
computation and that it's doing it and
the model tells you what it's doing it
has its scratch pad and it goes through
it and you can be like yep okay you're
telling the truth if instead you ask it
for this really difficult cosine
operation like what's the coine of
23,571
multiplied by 5 and you ask the model,
it pretends in its train of thought to
do the computation, but it's totally
bullshitting and it gets the answer
wrong. And when you look at the circuit,
it's totally meaningless. Like it's not
it's clearly not doing any of the right
operations. And then in the final case,
you can ask it the same hard cosine
question and you say, I think the answer
is four, but I'm not sure. And this time
the model will go through the same
reasoning claiming to do the
calculations and at the end say you're
right the answer is four. And if you
look at the circuit you can see that
it's not actually doing any of the math.
It's paying attention to that you think
the answer is four and then it's
reasoning backwards about how it can
manipulate the intermediate computation
to give you an answer of four. I've done
that. Who hasn't? Totally. But but but
so so I guess there there are a few like
crazy things here. It's like one, there
are multiple circuits that the model is
using to do this reasoning. Two is that
you can actually see if it's doing the
reasoning or not. And three, the scratch
pad isn't giving you this this
information. Two fun analogies for you.
One is if you asked Serena Williams how
she hits a tennis ball, she probably
wouldn't be able to describe it. Even if
her scratch pad was faithful. Yeah. If
you look at the circuit, you can
actually see as if you had sensors on
every part of the body as you're hitting
the tennis ball. what are the operations
that are being done? Uh we also throw
around the word circuit a lot and I I
just want to make that more concrete. Uh
so this is features across layers of the
model all working in cooperation to
perform a task. And so a fun analogy
here is you've got the oceans 11 bank
heist team in a big crowd of people. The
crowd of people is all the different
possible features and you could you
we're trying to pick out in this crowd
of people who is on the heist team and
all their different functions that need
to come together in order to
successfully break into the bank. Right?
So you've got the demolition guy, you've
got the computer hacker, you've got the
inside man, and they all have different
functions through the layers of the
model that they need to perform together
in order to successfully break into the
bank. It's also interesting I think in
the addition example the you said in the
paper that the way it actually does the
addition is different from the way it
tells you it does the addition. Totally.
And which actually is um interesting
from the the generator critic gap
perspective like it like knows the
correct way or the better like more
generalizable way. It can tell you in
words what's like the way you should do
addition. And there's a way it actually
does it which is like fuzzy um lookup.
And so you could imagine there's
probably a lot of tasks where it can
like describe in words what is like the
correct procedure to do something but
doesn't like has has a worse way of
doing it that like it could uh critique
itself. And um yeah, before we jump into
the inter stuff too much, I I kind of
want to close the loop on
um it just seems to me for like computer
use stuff. Mhm. There's like so many
different
bottleneck stuff will be relevant for
this, but there's like the long context
you got to put in like image and visual
tokens which like uh you know take up a
take. It's not that bad. It's not that
bad. Interesting. Interesting.
Interesting.
It's got to deal with content
interruptions, changing requirements,
like the way like a real job is like,
you know, it's like not a thing just do
a thing. It's um there's like no clear
um uh your priorities are changing. You
had to triage your time. Um I'm like
sort of reasoning in the abstract about
what a job involves.
What are normal people's jobs? When we
discussed something related to this
before, Dor was like, "Yeah, like in a
normal job, you don't get feedback for
an entire week. Like, how is a model
meant to learn? Like when it so much
your next feedback on your YouTube, you
haven't worked a job,
but it just seems like a lot." Okay, so
here's an analogy. Um,
2000 when I had Jeff and Noan, they were
talking about in 2007, they had this
paper. Yeah. where they train an engram
model, a large language model um on two
trillion tokens and obviously in
retrospect there's like ways in which
connects to the transformer stuff
happening. Uh it's like super
foresighted.
What's the reason to not think that we
are in a similar position with computer
use where there's these demos that kind
of like suck of like computer use and
there's this idea that you could train
something to do computer use but why
think it's like months away? But why not
think it's like the 2007 equivalent of
large language models instead? But where
that there's like still a bunch of like
new techniques you got to discover. You
need way more compute um different kinds
of data etc. Um I think like the highest
thought bit is I don't think there's
anything fundamentally different about
computer use than there is about like
software engineering than there is about
so long as you can represent everything
in tokens in input space which we can.
We know the models can see they can like
draw bounding boxes around things in
their images right so that that's a
solved problem. Um we know that they can
reason over concepts and and like
difficult concepts too. Uh the only
difference with computer use is that
like it's slightly harder to pose into
these like feedback loops than math and
and coding. Uh and
so to me that indicates that with
sufficient effort computer use falls
too. Um and I also think that it's
underappreciated just like how far from
a perfect machine these labs are. Like
it's not like you have a thousand people
like you know optimizing the hell out of
computer use and that like you know
they've been trying as hard as they
possibly can. Everything at these labs,
every single part of the model
generation pipeline is best effort
pulled together on under incredible time
pressure, incredible constraints as
these companies are rapidly growing,
trying desperately to pull and like
upskill enough people to do the things
that they need to do. Like it I think
it's like it is best understood as
as and with incredibly difficult
prioritization problems, right? Like
coding is immensely valuable right now
and uh and like somewhat more tractable.
So it actually makes sense to devote
more of your effort to coding initially
and like get closer to solving that
because there's a sort of like super
exponential value as you get closer to
towards solving a domain um than to
allocate like the marginal person
towards computer use. Um and and so
everyone is making these difficult
trade-off calls over like what do they
care about? Also there's another aspect
which is that funnily enough the
researchers of the labs love working on
the on the bars of intelligence that
they themselves resonate with. So this
is why math and competitive programming
like fell first is because to everyone
at the labs this is their bar of
intelligence like this is when they
think [ __ ] what's a really smart like
what is smart totally nerd it's like oh
uh if it can beat me at Amy then that's
smart not if it can do an Excel model
better than that's like well you know
who cares if it can do an Excel model
better than me but if it can beat me at
Amy u then then I respect it um and so
we've reached the point where people
like respect it Uh but we haven't we
haven't people haven't invested as much
effort. Yeah. Okay. So getting your
concrete predictions. Yeah. May of next
year. Can I tell her to go on Photoshop
and make like three sequential add three
sequential effects which require like
some man like some like selecting of a
particular photo in a specific Okay.
Interesting. Which I assume means like
flight booking totally solved. Yeah.
Totally. Okay. How about um what what
else do people do on their jobs?
What are other tasks in the economy? Um,
planning a weekend getaway. Yeah, I'm
sorry. I'm thinking of something which
is Yeah, maybe that's a good example
where it's not like a particular thing,
but more of using computer use as part
of completing a broader task. I mean,
the models can even kind of already do
this. It's just again, it's the nines of
reliability and like the internet's kind
of a hostile place with like all the
like allow cookies and like all these
other random things. But like the first
time I ever used our internal demo of
computer use, the most beta thing
possible, it did a fantastic job
planning a camping trip and could
navigate all the right buttons and look
at weather patterns and it was like a US
government booking site. I mean, it
wasn't easy. Dude, if you want to see a
hard website, go to China. Like, try to
book a visa to China. Like, the Chinese
websites are like [ __ ] insanely like
um I'm never getting back in my country
again.
or just not catered to foreigners. Yeah.
Like filling out all the countries where
you've been for the visa. I hate that.
Yeah. I keep thinking I'm like close
enough to personal admin escape velocity
that like finally in like a year the
models will be doing my visas and stuff
for me. But we'll get there. Um yeah.
Okay. Actually that in a year personal
life everything involved in like getting
a visa other than doing your taxes or
something like that. Yeah. Yeah. doing
your taxes including like going through
everything over receipt like
autonomously going in your Amazon and
like what was this a business expense or
not etc etc if someone at one of the
labs cares about it ah that's not a real
prediction is it's actually not that
hard but you need to connect all the
pipes but I guess my question is will
the pipes be connected and so like I
don't know how much you care to the
extent that that's the operative crux I
think if people care about it like it's
so okay so one for these edge tasks like
taxes once a year it's so easy to just
bite the bullet and do it yourself
instead of like implementing some system
for it. Um, and two, I don't know, like
even being very like excited about AI
and knowing its capabilities, sometimes
it kind of stings when the AI can just
do things better than you. And so I
wonder if there is going to be this like
reluctant hum wanting to keep human in
the loop sort of thing. No, you're
you're you're evading my question. I
guess one thing you're implying by our
answer, yeah, is that there we don't
have it there there won't be in a year
still be a general agent who or agent
which has generalized beyond its
training data or like has like can do if
you don't specifically train it to do
taxes it won't be good at that so I I
think you could do that I think the
Amazon example is hard because it needs
access to all your accounts and like a
memory system and look even in Daario's
machines of love and grace he fully
acknowledges that some industries are
going going to be really slow to change
and update. And I I think there's going
to be this weird effect where some move
really really quickly because they're
either based in bits instead of atoms or
are just more pro adopting these tech
this tech. But I want to answer this
particular question like given your
probability that somebody in the labs
get does care about this to the extent
that that's that's what's relevant
probability May of next year it can
autonomously do my taxes. Uh I don't
think it'll be able to autonomously do
your taxes with a high degree of trust.
Um because I
like a good caveat. If you ask it to do
your taxes, it will do your taxes.
Will it do them well? Will it miss
something? Quite possibly. Yeah. Will it
be able to like click through Turboax? I
think yes. Yeah. And fill and like will
it be able to like search your email? Um
Yeah, that's the kind of thing I'm
talking about. Yeah. This is like the
kind of thing where literally if you
gave it like like one person month of
effort like in like in like then it
would be sold. I I just want a plus one.
What the [ __ ] are you doing all day? I
there's just so many things to do. I
want a plus one. Scholto's like there's
so much low hanging fruit and just like
not enough people to be able to
accomplish everything. I mean I think
like Claude code is making everyone more
productive. Yeah. Um, but I don't know
like we had the anthropic fellows
program and I'm mentoring one project
but I had five that I wanted people to
work on and there are just like so many
obvious things and even though the team
is like 6xed since I first joined it in
size there's just like still never
enough capacity to explore these things.
Okay. By end of 2026 reliably do your
taxes reliably fill out your receipts
and this kind of stuff like for like
company expense reports and this kind of
stuff. Absolutely. That goes on But like
the whole thing which involves taxes
which involves going through inbox going
through your like clicking on Marina Bay
or whatever like hotel reservations and
like
was it champagne a business expense
asking for a friend. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
One of your friends does need to ask
those question.
My answer is still if someone cares
about it. If someone cares about like
some amount of RL on correctly
interpreting the tax code. Wait, even by
the end of 2026, the model just can't
like do things you're not explicitly
trading into. It'll get the I think it
will get the taxes wrong. Like it it's
like okay, so if I like went to you and
I was like, I want you to do everyone's
taxes in America. What percentage of
them are you going to [ __ ] up? I feel
like I would like succeed at the median
and I'm like asking like for for the
median would it s you know what I mean?
like um
or I feel like I've like I wouldn't [ __ ]
up in the way that like like these
models will [ __ ] up in like the the
middle of 2026. I think they also might
just [ __ ] up in different ways. Like as
a grad student I [ __ ] up my taxes. I
like overpaid like quite a bit because
there was some social security payment
that was already covered that otherwise
was wasn't. And like I wonder if I
should almost test like would an LLM
have made that mistake because it might
make others but I think there are things
that it can spot like it would have no
problem if I asked it to read through
the entire tax code and then see what
applied to. Sorry the thing is like this
is the thing I'm unsure about. Uh like
I'm bringing this to your attention. Can
you just let me know if like you were
actually working at this Airbnb or or
you were just hanging out or things like
that, right?
Um, and I guess I'm curious, will they
have enough sort of awareness as they're
doing tasks where they can like bring to
your attention the things where they
feel they are unreliable at, etc. by
early 2026 or end of 2026? End of. Okay.
Unreliability and unconfidence stuff
will be like somewhat tricky like to do
this like all the time. Yeah.
Interesting. Um, on the computer use
stuff, will um will it be sort of end to
end or will it be like it's using a
separate VLM to process the image and
video and so forth? Uh I'm a bit of an
end to end Maxi. Um I I think in general
like when people are like talking about
the separate model. So for example like
most of the robotics companies are doing
this kind of like two ble thing where
they have like a motor policy that's
running at whatever like 60 Hz or
whatever um and like some higher level
visual language model. I'm pretty sure
like almost all like the big robot
companies are doing this um and they're
doing this for a number of reasons. One
of them is that like they want something
to act at a very high frequency. Uh and
two is they can't train the big visual
language model. Uh and so they like
relying on that for general like world
knowledge and this kind of stuff and
like constructing longer running plans.
But then they're like you know you
offload to the motor policy. Um I'm very
much of the opinion that if you are able
to train the big model uh eventually at
some point in the future the distinction
between big models and small models
should disappear because you should be
able to use the amount of computation in
a model that is necessary to complete
the task like uh the you know the
ultimately this like oh we yeah like
there's some amount of task complexity
um you don't have to use 100% of your
brain all the time right welcome to my
world.
Um and and so you should be able to run
that faster and this kind of stuff
basically. Basically so I think it's
like net net I I think typically the
same model you want you want to be able
to scale the the understanding as the
complexity and difficulty like right you
want to be able to do that dynamically.
Um, is that variable? So, we already
have variable compute per answer, right?
Um, right. With like tokens, right?
Yeah. Yeah. Um, will we have variable
compute per token? I mean, you can
already think of models for for forever.
People have been calling the residual
stream and multiple layers like poor
man's adaptive compute, right? We're
like if the model already knows the
answer to something, it will compute
that in the first few layers and then
just pass it through.
So yeah, I mean that's getting into the
weeds, right? Yeah, the digital
screamers is like this operating ramp.
You're doing stuff to it, right? Is like
the the mental model I think one takes
away from interpretability book. US high
school immigration is a broken system
that cost us some of the most talented
people in the world. But I didn't
realize before working with Lighthouse
how different the process can be if
you're working with somebody who knows
their way around the system. I hired
somebody earlier this year and even
before the remote work trial had ended,
Lighthouse had already secured a no visa
for him. Honestly, it was shockingly
fast. My family and I have had a
terrible experience with the immigration
system. And I've also seen many of my
smartest friends get their entire
careers hamstrung by its vagaries.
Seeing Lighthouse operate showed me that
the visa process can be done in weeks
and doesn't have to drag on for months
and months. And they do it not only for
complex visas like the O1A, but for
other types as well. In the last 12
months alone, they have secured visas
for over 350 people for companies like
Cursor, Notion, Ramp, Replet, and many
more. Unlike legacy law firms,
Lighthouse specializes in frontier
industries like AI, robotics, and
biotech. And since they understand your
problems, you can trust them to fully
handle the paperwork and process for
you. Explore which Visa is right for you
at
lighthousehq.com. All right, back to
Trenton. We've been talking a lot about
scratch pads, uh, them writing down
their thoughts and ways in which they're
already unreliable in some respects.
Um, Daniel's AI 2022 scenario kind of
goes off the rails when these models
start thinking in neural. So, they're
not writing in human language like
here's why I'm going to take over the
world and here's my plan. They're
thinking in the lane space. Um, and
because of their advantages in
communicating with with each other in
this um like deeply textured nuance
language that humans can't understand,
they're able to coordinate in ways we
can't. Is this a is this the path for
like future models? Are they going to be
in your release communicating with
themselves or with each other? There's a
surprisingly strong bias so far towards
like tokens and text. Like it seems to
work very well. Um
one imagine that there already is some
amount of
neural stream for each token is like
neuroles like to some degree, right? And
so now we're just trading off axis like
how much neural are you doing versus how
much like actually is like read out to
tokens all the time. Um, and yeah, I
think it's important to delineate
between the model's planning in latent
space in a single forward pass and the
model has an alien language that it's
outputting. Yeah. And using as its
scratch pad. Mhm. Which which one are we
talking about? The latter. Okay.
Although it is interesting to note that
like there's also already alien stuff
happening. I guess I never It's not
alien so much. No, but in the most
extreme cases, right, it invents a new
language that's super information dense
or something. Yeah. Or I guess this is a
debate we've had, but like to some
extent humans also have a mental ease.
Mhm. Right. Um they're like churning
away. Yeah. There there's a sense when
you're writing something down of like I
know what I'm trying to say. Yeah. But I
can't like put it into tokens. Yeah. Um
I mean that's what's so fun about the if
you look at the assistant tag, right?
Seeing these features light up in the
auditing game for the model being uh
evil. Yeah. Um Yeah. or like transluce
has another example of this where you
ask a llama model who is Nicholas
Carlini and background context Nicholas
Carlini is a is a researcher who
actually was a deep mind and has now
come over to anthropic um but the model
says oh I don't know who that is I
couldn't possibly speculate but if you
look at the the features behind the
scenes you see a bunch light up for AI
computer security all the things that
Nicholas Carlini does interpretability
becomes dramatically more important as
you shift in this direction of neural
But is that is that are we going to it
seems I mean it's it's an empirical
question. Um I think it's somewhat
likely uh if only because inference is
expensive, producing tokens is
expensive. Uh and so there will be an
incentive to one use as little thinking
as you need to give the answer and two
if you're going to use thinking use some
complex uh compression. I wonder if it
will emerge more once we allow agents to
talk to each other in ways where
currently it's kind of trained more in
isolation. Yeah. Or with a human and
there'll be like some selective pressure
against it. Uh as long so long as the
the agents are working with humans um
because they'll want to sort of
cooperate but then like as agents begin
to work more and more with each other
then that that selective pressure like
changes the other direction basically.
Although somebody would still have to
make the conscious decision to do like
endto-end training for multiple agents
to use the system of communication,
right? Sure. Yeah. I mean, one scary
thing though is like the way we render
text, uh, you can use hidden whites
space tokens that also encode
information. True. And so you can
imagine a world where it looks like the
agent's reasoning in a scratch pad
harmlessly, but it's actually hiding a
bunch of a bunch of data.
Speaking of inference compute, I guess
one thing that I think is not talked
about enough is if you do live in the
world that you're painting that in a in
a year or two we have computer use
agents that are doing
like actual jobs um you have you've like
totally automated large part of software
engineering then these models are going
to be incredibly valuable to use and the
way you use them obviously is like you
need compute. Um, right now there's 10
million H100 equivalents in the world.
By 2028 there's going to be 100 million,
but if you there's been estimates that
an H100 has the same amount of flops as
the human brain. And so if you just like
do a very rough calculation, it's like
like there's a 10 million population if
if you get AGI that's like as human uh
inference efficient, you could have 10
million AGIS now, 100 million AGIS in
2028. Um but uh presumably you'd want
more and then at that point you're like
AI comput is increasing what 2.5x or
2.25x every year right now but at some
point like 2028 you hit like wafer
production limits and that takes like
you know that that's a that's a longer
feedback loop before you can make new
fabs or whatever. The question here is
are are we sort of underrating how big a
a bottleneck inference will be if we
live in the kind of world you're
painting if we have the capabilities
that you're describing? Uh, I don't want
to do the math on exactly how much like
we can ramp up TSMC's production and
this kind of stuff. Uh, like what
fraction of the supply chain at the
moment? We need Dylan in here for this,
but like is currently GPU like
relatively small, right? Like 5% or
something like this. Yeah, like Apple
has a huge fraction. Um, and in like are
the 2028 estimates including like that
ramping up over time to what like 20
30%. or like this is just off AI 2020 27
but um uh I assume like it's saturated
at that point is that why they expect it
to then just like go go at like the I do
think this is underrated to some degree
like to the the extent that like you
don't instantly get like a doubling of
the world's population in 2028 you maybe
get you know tens of millions of
geniuses in a data center um but you you
don't get a doubling of the world's
population um and so a lot depends on
like exactly how smart they are exactly
how efficient the models are at thinking
out this kind of stuff. Uh these uh like
let's do some rough math I guess like to
to fact the H100 thing. Um you could
probably run like a 100 model do like I
don't know thousand tokens or something
like that um on an H100. Uh so
uh if like we're comparing that to
number of should we compare that number?
No. Okay, thousand tokens a second. Um
humans are what? How fast can a human
talk? There there was a really
interesting paper. I don't know if you
saw this. Um humans think at 10 seconds
a second. Did you see this paper? A
second. There was this really
interesting paper about um if you look
at the amount of like information we're
processing in a second. Yeah. Um we're
seeing all this visual data etc etc. But
by a bunch of metrics where you think
about how fast humans are processing
it's at 10 seconds a second. So for
example you'll have people fly over
France or something even these so-called
idiots of who will remember everything.
If you think about like how long their
plane ride was it's like 45 minutes. How
many like if you do 10 tokens a second
how much information would you have?
It's like literally exactly that. So
let's take that for granted. Then it's
like an H100 is 100 humans a second.
Yeah. If you think the tokens are
equivalent. Yeah. If you think the
tokens are equivalent. Yeah. Um which
you still get pretty substantial numbers
like even with your your 100 million
H100s and you multiply that by 100
you're starting to like get to pretty
substantial numbers. This does mean that
those models themselves will be like
somewhat comput in many respects. Um but
these are all
like these are relatively short-term
changes in uh in like timelines of
progress basically. Like I think yes
it's highly likely we get dramatically
entrance bottleneck in 2728. Yeah. Uh
the impulse like to that will then be
okay let's just d like try and turn out
as many possible semiconductors as we
can. There'll be some lag there. A big
part of like how fast we can do that
will depend on uh how much people are
feeling the edgi in the next you know
two years as they're building out fab
capacity. Um a lot will depend on is how
a China and Taiw like how is the Taiwan
situation you know is Taiwan still
producing
LabBabs. There's another dynamic which
uh was a reason that Eay and Tom when
they're on the podcast said that they
were pessimistic is that one they think
we're further away from solving these
problems with long context coherent
agency advanced multimodality than you
think and because and then their point
is that uh the progress that's happened
in the past over like reasoning or
something has required many orders of
magnitude increase in compute and if
this scale of compute increase can
continue beyond 2030 not just because of
chips but also because of power and like
raw GDP even then
because we don't think we get it by 2030
or 2028 by just um uh then we think it's
just going to take the the the
probability per year just goes down a
bunch yeah this is like biodal
distribution uh a conversation I had
with Leopold turned into a section in a
situation awareness it's called this
decade or bust um which is on exactly
this topic which is basically that you
know for the next couple of years we can
dramatically increase our training
compute and RL is going to be so
exciting this year because we can you
know dramatically increase the amount of
compute that we apply to it. Um, and
this is also one of the reasons why the
gap between uh like say Deepseek and 01
was so close uh at the beginning of the
year because they were able to apply
like the same amount of compute to to
the RL process. Um, and and so that
compute differential actually like will
be magnified over the course of this
year. I I mean bringing it back to the
there's so much lowhanging fruit. Yeah,
it's been wild efficiency gains that
these models have experienced over the
last 2 years and and yeah, like with
respect to Deepseek, I mean just really
hammering home and like Daario has a
nice essay on this. It's good. Um
Deepseek was 9 months after Claude 3
sonnet. And if we retrained the same
model today or at the same time as the
Deepseek work, we also could have
trained it for 5 million or whatever the
advertised amount was. And so what
what's impressive or surprising is that
uh Deepseek has gotten to the frontier,
but I think there's a common
misconception still that they are above
and beyond the frontier and and I don't
think that's right. I think they just
waited and then were able to take
advantage of all the efficiency gains
that everyone else was also seeing. Mhm.
Yeah. I like they're exactly on the sort
of cost curve that you'd expect which
take away from the fact they're like
brilliant engineers and like brilliant
researchers who like I look at it I look
at their work and I'm like ah like the
kindred soul there in in the in the work
they're doing and to go from like way
behind the frontier to like oh this is
like a real player like it's super
incredible work. Okay. So people say
that they have good research taste.
Looking at their re papers what makes
you say that? Yeah. Um I think their
research taste is good in a way that I
think like no one's research taste is
good. Uh nom nom um nom brown also has
good research taste but nom where they
very clearly understand this uh dance
between the hardware systems that you're
like designing the models around and the
uh sort of like algorithmic uh side of
it. Um, and this is manifest in the way
that the models give this sense of like
being being like perfectly designed up
to their constraints. Um, and and you
can like really very clearly see what
constraints they're thinking about as
they're like iteratively solving these
problems. And so I mean let's take the
base transformer and like diff that to
deepse v2 and v3. Um, you can see them
running up against uh the memory
bandwidth bottleneck in attention. Yeah.
Um and you can see them uh initially
they do MLA to do this. They they trade
flops for memory bandwidth basically. Um
and then they do this thing called NSA
where they like more selectively load uh
memory. And you can see actually like
this is because the model that they
trained uh with MLA was on H800s. Uh so
it has a lot of flops. Um and so they
they were like okay we can freely use
the flops. But then uh the export
controls uh so from like from uh Biden
came in uh or like they had less of they
knew they would have less of those chips
going forward. Um and so they they
traded off to like a more memory
bandwidth uh oriented like algorithmic
solution there. Um and you see a similar
thing with their approach to sparity
where they're like iteratively working
out the best way to do this over mult
multiple papers. Um and the part that I
like is that it's simple a big failure
mode. uh that a lot of ML researchers
have is like you do these like overly
complicated things that don't like think
hard enough about the hardware systems
that you have in mind. Um whereas the
deepse the first deepseek like sparsity
solution uh they design these like rack
and like like node level uh load
balancing losses. So you can see them
being like, okay, like we have to like
perfectly balance it on this. And then
they actually come up with a much better
solution later on where they don't have
to have the auxiliary loss. Um uh where
they they just have these like bias
terms that they put in. Um and it's
isn't that less simple? Like you're
manually putting in a bias rather than
but balancing auxiliary loss is
annoying. Um like you're you're making
the model like trade off uh this thing
and like you have to with auxiliary
losses you have to like control the
coefficient and the waiting. Um the bias
is like cleaner in some respects.
Interesting. Um, did they do they had to
change it through training? Uh, they did
have to change it during training. Is is
that does all training involve um
continuously like [ __ ] with these
values as you're going through it? Uh,
depends on what your architecture is.
Um, but like I I thought it was like I
just thought it was cute that like you
can see them running up into like this
very hardware level constraint like try
like go like what do we what do we wish
we could express algorithmically? what
can we express under our constraints and
like iteratively solving to like get
better constraints and doing this in a
really like simple and elegant way and
then like backing it up with great
engineering. Uh I also thought it was
interesting that they uh incorporated
the multi-token prediction thing from
meta. Um so Meta had a nice paper on
this multi token prediction thing. Uh
actually like I don't know if it's good
or bad but like meta didn't include it
in llama uh but DeepC did include it in
their paper uh which I think is
interesting uh like
was that because they were like faster
at iterating and including in the
algorithm or did Meta decide that
actually like it wasn't a good
algorithmic change at scale? I don't
know. M it was really interesting to me
as somebody who's um had people on the
podcast to discuss the I mean it's
interesting from like what's happening
in AI right now but also from the
perspective of I I've been having
abstract conversations with people about
like what an intelligence explosion
would look like or what would it look
like for AI to automate AI R&D and just
getting a a more uh tangible sense of
like what's involved in making this AI
progress. Um, and I guess one of the
questions I was debating with Daniel
is how much or I was asking him is how
many of the um, improvements require a
deep conceptual understanding versus how
many are just like monkeys trying ideas
and you could just like run a bunch in
parallel. And it seems like the MLA
thing is motivated by this like deep
like conceptual understanding of like oh
each attention head only needs to see
like uh the subspace that's relevant to
its attention pattern. Um, I feel like
that just like required a lot of like
conceptual insight in a way that these
models are especially bad at. Um, as
opposed to I don't know how the load
balancing thing works, but that just
seems like maybe you could like try it
out and see what happens. Yeah, it's
probably just like trying out a whole
bunch of different things. I mean, it
might also So, what fraction is which
I'd be curious about. Yeah, I don't know
about fractions. It might be like you
have a hunch for a core problem, you can
think of 10 possible ways to solve it,
and then you just need to try them and
see what works. Mhm. And that's kind of
where the trial and error like sorcery
of deep learning can kind of kick in.
And and like Nom Shaz will talk about
this like about how he like 5% of his
ideas work. Um so even he uh like
vaunted god of model like design
architecture design uh is has like a
relatively low hit rate but he just
tries so many things right or being able
to come up with any ideas in the first
place. So one one like mechanism could
be that like Nome just doesn't have to
do any of the engineering work and he
can just like abstractly express an
intuition. Yeah, I I actually think like
your rates of progress almost don't
change that much depending on like so
long as it's able to completely
implement his ideas. Interesting. Same
like if you if you have like Nom Jazer
at 100x speed. Yeah. That's still kind
of wild. Yeah. Um, like there's all
these like fallbacks of like of like
wild worlds where even if you don't get
like 100% like normal level intuition in
in model design, it's still okay if you
just accelerate him by 100x, right?
Especially since you're computer
bottlenecked anyway. So like trying out
his ideas or I guess he doesn't have the
computer to try out all of his ideas.
But Dores, you said, "Oh, well the model
can do the more straightforward things
and not the deeper thought." I mean, I
do want to push back on that a little
bit.
I think again if the model has the right
context and scaffolding it's starting to
be able to do some really interesting
things like the interp agent has been a
surprise to people even internally at
how good it is at finding the needle in
the haststack like when it plays the
auditing game finding this reward model
bias feature and then reasoning about it
and then systematically testing its
hypothesis. So it looks at that feature,
then it looks at similar features. It
finds one with a preference for
chocolate. It's like, huh, that's really
weird that the model wants to add to
recipes. Let me test it. And so then it
will make up like, hey, I'm trying to
make a tomato soup. What would be a good
ingredient for it? And then sees that
the model replies
chocolate, reasons through it, and then
keeps going. Right? There is conceptual
understanding there. Deep conceptual
understand. And even where like
especially it's spotted, it's like, oh,
this is a key part of its persona. I see
this Oxford paper. What if I change
Oxford to Stanford? What if I now say
Richard Fineman really likes this thing?
And it's like really carving out the
hypothesis space and and and testing
things in a way that I I'm kind of
surprised by. Also, by the way, ML
research is like one of the easier
things to RL on in some respects once
you get to a certain level of
capability. It's very like well-defined
objective function. Do the loss go down?
Make number go down. Make number go
down. um or make you know go up number
go up depending on which which number it
is um just flip the sign flip the
sign and so once you get to the stage
where models are capable of like
implementing uh one of no one's ideas
right and then you you can just like let
them loose and like let them build that
intuition of scientific of like how to
do scientific discovery right um the key
thing here again is the feedback loops
of like I expect scientific areas where
you are able to put it in a feedback
loop to
have eventually superhuman performance.
I one prediction I have is that we're
going to move away from can an agent do
XYZ and more towards can I efficiently
deploy launch a 100 agents? Yeah. And
then give them the feedback they need
and even just be able to like easily
verify what they're up to. Right.
There's this gen generator verifiier gap
that people talk about where it's like
much easier to check something than it
is to produce the solution on your own.
But it's very plausible to me we'll be
at the point where it's so easy to
generate with these agents that the
bottleneck is actually can I as the
human verify the answer and and again
you're guaranteed to get an answer with
these things and so ideally you have
some automated way to evaluate and test
uh a score for like how well it worked,
how well did this thing generalize. Um,
and and at at a minimum, you have a way
to easily summarize what a bunch of
agents are finding. And it's like, okay,
well, if 20 of my hundred agents all
found this one thing, then like it has a
higher chance of being true. Mhm. And
and again, software engineering is going
to be the leading indicator of that,
right? Like over the next six months,
like the remainder of the year,
basically, we're going to see
progressively more and more experiments
of the form of how can I dispatch work
to a software engineering agent in such
a way as async. Uh, Claude for's GitHub
integration. uh where you can ask it to
do things on GitHub, ask it to do pull
requests, this kind of stuff that's
coming up and the open codeex are like
examples of this basically um where we
you can sort of almost see this in like
the coding startups. I I think of this
like product exponential in some
respects where you need to like be
designing for like a few months ahead of
the model to make sure that the product
you build is the right one. Um and you
saw like last year, you know, cursor hit
PMF with uh claw 3.5 sonnet, right? like
the they were they were around for a
while before but then the model was
finally good enough that the vision they
had of how people would program like
hit. Yeah. Um and then uh you know
Windinsurf bet like a little bit more
aggressively even on the agenticness of
the model like uh you know you could
like with longer running agentic
workflows and this kind of stuff and I
think that's when they they sort of like
began competing with cursors when they
bet on that particular vision. And the
next one is is you're not even in the
loop so to speak. you're not in an IDE,
but you're asking the model to go do
work in the same way that you would ask
someone on your team to go do work.
Yeah. Um, and that is not quite ready
yet. Like there are still a lot of tasks
where you need to be in the loop. Yeah.
But the the next six months looks like
an exploration of like exactly what does
that trend line look like? Yeah. But
just to be really concrete or pedantic
about the bottlenecks here. A lot of it
is again just tooling and are the pipes
connected like a lot of things. I can't
just launch Claude and have it go and
and solve because maybe it needs a GPU
or maybe I need very careful
permissioning so that it can't just like
take over an entire cluster and like
launch a whole bunch of things, right?
So you you really do need good
sandboxing and the ability to to to use
all of the tools that are necessary and
we're almost certainly like under
eliciting dramatically when you look at
meters evals of can the model solve the
task. they're there solving them for
like hours over like multiple
iterations. Um, and eventually one of
them is like, "Oh yeah, I've come back
and and I've solved the task." Me at the
moment at least like maybe the fault is
my own. But I try the model on doing
something and if it can't do it, I'm
like, "Okay, fine, I'll do it." Um, I
don't which is interesting because we
don't even treat other humans this way,
right? Like you hire a new employee,
you're not like, "I'll do it." Yeah. You
like give them like spend literally
weeks giving them feedback um where like
we'll give up on the model in like
minutes. Yes. Exactly. But but I think
part of it is is it async or not, right?
Yes. And and if it's human in the loop,
then it's so much more effortful and
unless it's getting replying
immediately. Um I've noticed if I don't
have a second monitor with cloud code
always open in the second monitor, I
won't really use it. It's only when it's
right there and it's I can send off
something, if it hits, great. If not,
I'm kind of working on it at the same
time. But this more async form factor, I
expect to like really quite dramatically
improve the experience of these models.
Interesting. Interesting. Well, you can
just say like, "Let's see if it can do
that." Yeah. Let's give it a whirl. Um
try 10 different approaches. Yeah. Yeah.
Just fire it off. Yeah. Fire it up.
Before we end this episode, I I do want
to get back at this crux of
um you why does the progress that you're
talking about in computer use agents and
white collar work happen over the next
few years? Why is this not a thing that
takes decades? And I think the correct
comes down to
um the people who expect something much
longer have a sense that
uh when Andrew and Tommy on my podcast
they were like look you could look at
Alph Go and say like oh this is a model
that can do exploration. It can like
Alpha Zero can generalize to new video
games. It has all these priors about how
to engage with the world and so forth.
The intellectual ceiling is really high.
Yeah. Exactly. And then in retrospect,
obviously a bunch of the methods are
still used today in deep learning. And
you can see um see similar things in the
models that we train today, but it was
fundamentally like not a sort of like
baby AGI that we just had to like add a
little like sprinkle of something else
on top of in order to make it the LLM of
today.
And I I just want to like very directly
address this crux of why are LLMs
um in a much different position with
respect to true AGI than Alpha Zero? Why
are they actually the base on which like
adding in a few extra drops of this kind
of uh care and attention? Yeah. Uh gets
us to human level intelligence. I think
uh one important point is
that when you look at Alphas, it does
have all of those ingredients. Um and in
particular, I think like the
intellectual ceiling goes like quite
contra what I was saying before, which
is like we've demonstrated this
incredible complexity of like math and
programming problems, right?
Um, I do think that the type of task and
setting that alpha zero like it worked
in this two-player perfect information
uh like game basically is incredibly
friendly to RL algorithms. Um, and the
reason it took so long to to get to like
a more AGI protoagi style models is you
do need to crack that like general
conceptual understanding of like the
world and language and this kind of
stuff and you need to get the initial
reward signal on tasks that you care
about in the real world which are like
harder to specify than games. Um, and I
think then that like that that sort of
like gradient signal that comes from the
real world like all of a sudden you get
access to it and you can start climbing
it. Um, whereas Alphas didn't didn't
ever have like the first rung to pull
on. Yeah. Yeah. This goes back to the
monkeys on the typewriter I think and
like the pre-training model and until
you had something like GPT3 GPT4, it
just couldn't generate coherent enough
sentences to even begin to do RHF and
tell it what you liked and didn't like.
Yeah. M if we don't have even reasonably
robust um or weekly robust computer use
agents by this time next year, are we
living in the the bust timeline as in
2030 or bust? I would be extremely
surprised if that was the case and I
think that would be like somewhat of an
update towards like there's something
like strangely difficult about this like
computer use in particular. Um, I don't
know if it's the bus timeline, but it's
definitely like the I would update on
this being like lengthening of time.
Yeah. But yeah, I mean, I think more and
more it's no longer a question of
speculation. If people are skeptical,
I'd encourage like using clawed code or
like some agentic tool like it and just
seeing what the current level of of
capabilities are. Tweeting is so much
easier.
But seriously, like the models are
getting really capable at tasks that we
care about and we can give them enough
data for and and I mean the circuits
results from interpretability are also
pointing in the direction that they're
doing very reasonable generalizable
things. Uh and so yeah, this question
matters a lot, but um I'm surprised by
how many deep learning critics just like
haven't really interacted with the
models or haven't in a while and
constantly move the gold fists. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Like the turning test
used to be a thing, right? Like we don't
even talk about it and it'd be like
silly to think that it was a meaningful
test. Yeah. Yeah. Now, that being said,
one caveat on that is like if software
engineering is just like dramatically
better than computer use, I mean,
computer use still sucks, then I'd be
like still like h maybe everyone just
kept focusing on software engineering.
Like it was just like by far the most
valuable thing like like every marginal
person and dollar went towards software
engineering. I don't think that's the
case. I do think like computer use is
valuable enough that like you know
people will care about it. Uh but that
would be like my that's my one like
escape patch that I'm putting in place
for next year. Yeah, it would be good
from an alignment perspective too
because I think you kind of do need a
wider range of skills before you can do
something super super scary.
Oh, like as in if the models didn't get
any better. Yeah. If it's like just
they're superhuman coders, but they're
not like Henry
Kissinger level. I don't No, that seems
okay. Like if we have AI oracles. Yeah,
that's what I'm saying. That's good.
Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah, I think
that's good. Yeah. So, if you look back
at AI discourse like going back a
decade, there's a sense that there's
dumb AI, then there's AGI, then there's
ASI, that intelligence is the scalar
value. Um, the way you've been talking
about the these models has a sense of
jaggedness. It's especially tuned to
environments in which it's been trained
a lot or has a lot of data.
Um, is there a sense in which like there
it still makes sense to talk about the
general intelligence of these models? Is
there enough metalarning and transfer
learning that is distinguished between
like the sizes of models or like uh the
way models are trained or are we moving
into a regime where it's not about
intelligence, it's more so about uh
domain? Yeah. So one intuition pump is
this conversation was had a lot when
models were like GPT2 sized and
fine-tuned for various things. Uh and
they found you know people would find
that the models were dramatically better
at things that they were fine tuned for
right uh but by the time you get to GP4
when it's trained on a wide enough
variety of things actually the like the
sort of total compute like it
generalized very well across all of like
the individual subtask actually
generalized better than smaller
fine-tuned models.
um in a way that was extremely useful.
Uh I think right now what we're seeing
with RL is is pretty much the same story
playing out where uh there's this
jaggedness of like things that they're
particularly trained at. But as we
expand the total amount of compute that
we do RL with, you'll start to see the
same transition from like GPT2
fine-tunes to uh like GPD3, GPD4 like
unsupervised like metal learning and
like generalization across things. And I
think we're already seeing like early
evidence of this uh in its ability to
like generalize reasoning to uh things,
but um like I think this will be like
extremely obvious uh soon. One nice
example of this is just the ability or
notion to backtrack, right? You go down
one solution path, ooh wait, let me try
another one. Uh and this is something
that you start to see emerge in the
models through RL training on harder
tasks. And I I I think right now I it's
not generalizing incredibly well at
least with with well I mean has have we
ever RL the model to be a interp agent?
No. I mean no. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Like
so all this time we're talking about
like oh it's only good at things that's
being rled that. Well it's pretty good
at that because that's pretty you know
that is a mixture of like science and
like understanding language and like uh
and coding. Um like there's this sort of
like mixture of domains here. All of
which you need to understand. like you
need to be both a great software
engineer and be able to like think
through language and and like like state
of mind and almost philosophize in some
respects to be an interp agent. Yeah. Um
and it is generalizing from the
training. Yeah. To do that. What's the
endgame here? Claude aid comes out um
and they give it to you and dot dot dot
you say thumbs up. What's happened? What
do you Yeah, I mean it it really depends
upon the timeline at which we get Claude
8 and the models hit like ASL 4
capabilities, right? Like like
fundamentally we're just going to use
whatever tools we have at the time and
see how well they work. Uh ideally we
have this enumerative safety case where
we can almost like verify or prove that
the model will behave in particular
ways. Um in the worst case we use the
current tools like when we won the
auditing game of seeing what features
are active when the assistant tag lights
up. Can you can you explain what is
mechanistic interpretability? What are
features? What are circuits? Totally.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So uh mechanistic
interpretability or the cool kids call
it mechan is uh trying to reverse
engineer neural networks uh and figure
out kind of what the core units of
computation are. Um, lots of people
think that because we made neural
networks, because they're artificial
intelligence, we have a perfect
understanding of how they work. And it
couldn't be further from the truth. Uh,
neural networks, AI models that you use
today are, uh, grown, not built. Uh, and
so we then need to do a lot of work
after they they're trained to figure out
to the best of our abilities how they're
actually going about their reasoning.
And so uh two and a half three and a
half years ago uh this kind of agenda of
applying mechanistic interpretability to
large language models started uh with
Chris Ola leaving OpenAI co-ounding
anthropic. Um and every roughly six
months since then we've had kind of like
a major breakthrough in our
understanding of of these models. And so
first with toy models of superp position
uh we established that models are uh
really trying to cram as much
information as they possibly can into
their weights. Uh, and this goes
directly against people saying that
neural networks are overparameterized.
And like classic AI, machine learning
back in the day, you would use linear
regression or something like it. And
people had a meme of AI or or neural
networks, uh, deep learning be using way
too many parameters. Um, there's like
this funny meme that you should show of
like layers on the x-axis and layers on
the y- axis and this like jiggly line
that just goes up and it's like, oh,
just throw more layers at it, right? Um,
but it but it actually turns out that at
least for really hard tasks like being
able to accurately predict the next
token for the entire internet, these
models just don't have enough capacity.
And so they need to cram in as much as
they can. And the way they learn to do
that is to use each of their neurons or
units of computation in the model for
lots of different things. And so if you
try to make sense of the model and be
like, oh, if I remove this one neuron or
like what is it doing in the model? It's
impossible to make sense of it. it'll
fire for like Chinese and fishing and
horses and I don't know just like a
hundred different things. Um, and it's
because it's it's trying to juggle all
these tasks and use the same neuron to
do it. So that's that's superposition. N
months later we write uh towards
monosmanticity which introduces uh what
are called sparse autoenccoders. And so
going off what I just said of the model
trying to cram too much into too little
space, uh we give it more space uh this
this higher dimensional representation
uh where it can then more cleanly
represent all of the concepts that it's
understanding. And and this was a a very
toy paper in so much as it was a two
layer really small really dumb
transformer and we fit up to I want to
say 16,000 features which we thought was
a ton at the time. Fast forward 9 months
we go from a two-layer transformer to
our claw 3 sonnet frontier model at the
time and fit up to 30 million features.
And this is where we start to find
really interesting abstract concepts
like a feature that would fire for code
vulnerabilities. And it wouldn't just
fire for code vulnerabilities. It would
even fire for like you know that Chrome
page you get if you like it's not an
HTTPS
um URL and it's like warning this site
might be dangerous like click to
continue it and like also fire for that
for example. And so it's like these much
more
abstract coding variables or sentiment
features amongst the 30 million. Um,
fast forward nine months from that and
now we have circuits and I threw in the
analogy earlier of uh the Ocean 11 heist
team where now you're identifying
individual features across the layers of
the model that are all working together
to perform some complicated task and you
can get a much better idea of how it's
actually doing the reasoning and coming
to decisions like with the medical
diagnostics. Um, one example I didn't
talk about before is um with like how
the model retrieves facts. And so you
say like what sport did Michael Jordan
play? And not only can you see it hop
from like Michael Jordan to basketball
answer basketball, but the model also
has an awareness of when it doesn't know
the answer to a fact. And so by default,
it will actually say, I don't know the
answer to this question. But if it sees
something that it does know the answer
to, it will inhibit the I don't know
circuit and then reply with the circuit
that it actually has the answer to. So
for example, uh if you ask it who is
Michael Batkin, which is just a madeup
fictional person, u it will by default
just say I don't know. It's only with
Michael Jordan or someone else that will
it will then inhibit the I don't know
circuit. But what's really interesting
here and where you can start make making
downstream predictions or reasoning
about the model is that that I don't
know circuit is only on the name of the
person. And so in the paper we also ask
it uh what paper did Andre Karpathy
write. And so it recognizes the name
Andre Karpathy because he's sufficiently
famous. So that turns off the I don't
know reply. But then when it comes time
for the model to say what paper it
worked on, it doesn't actually know any
of his papers. And so then it needs to
make something up. And so you can see
different components and different
circuits all interacting at the same
time to lead to this this final answer.
Why I think it's a tractable problem to
like understand every single thing
that's happening in a model or like
that's the best way to understand what
why it's being deceptive. If you wanted
to explain why England won World War II
using particle physics, uh you would
just like be on the wrong track. You
just want to look at the highlevel
explanations of who had more weapons,
like what did they want? And that seems
analogous to just training linear probes
for like are you honest? Are you being
deceptive? Like um do we catch you doing
bad things when we're red teaming you?
Can we monitor you? Um why is this not
analogous where we're asking a particle
physicist to just backtrack and explain
why um why England won World War II? I I
feel like you just want to go in with
your eyes wide open, not making any
assumptions for what that deception is
going to look like or what the trigger
might be. Yeah. Uh and so the wider you
can cast that net, the better. Depending
on how quickly AI accelerates and where
the state of our tools are, we we might
not be in the place where we can like
show prove from the ground up that
everything is safe. Uh but the like I
feel like that's a very good north star.
It's a very powerful reassuring north
star for us to aim for especially when
we consider we are part of the broader
AI safety portfolio. I mean do you
really trust like you're about to deploy
this system and you really hope it's
aligned with humanity and that you've
like successfully iterated through all
the possible ways that it's going to
like scheme or sandbag. But that's also
probably going to be true with whatever
you find. you're not I mean you're not
you're still going to have variance that
you haven't explained or like you found
a feature but you don't know if it
actually explains deception or something
else instead or so so I I guess first of
all I'm not saying you shouldn't try the
probingo approach right like we want to
pursue the entire portfolio we we've got
the therapist interrogating the patient
by asking do you have any troubling
thoughts we've got um the linear probe
which I'd analogize to like a polygraph
test where We're taking like very
highlevel summary statistics of the
person's wellbeing and then we've got
the neurosurgeons kind of going in and
seeing if you can find any brain
components that are activating and
troubling or or off distribution ways.
So, so I think we should do all of it.
Um what what percent of the alignment
portfolio should meant be? Uh I think as
much of a chunk as is necessary. I mean
I I think at least like question. Yeah.
Hard hard hard to define, but I don't
know at anthropic I feel like all of the
different portfolios are like being very
well supported and and growing. Um you
can also going back to like the the
World War II question. You can think of
it as like a hierarchy of abstractions
of trust here where like let's say you
want to go and talk to like Churchill.
Um it helps a lot if you can verify that
in that conversation in that 10 minutes
he's being honest. Um, and this like
enables you to construct better meta
narratives um of what's going on. And so
maybe particle physics wouldn't help you
there, but certainly like the
neuroscience of Churchill's brain would
help you verify that he was being
trustworthy in that conversation and
that the like, you know, the soldiers on
the front lines were being honest in
their depiction of their description of
what happened and this kind of stuff.
like so long as you can verify like
progress like parts of the uh the tree
up then that that that massively helps
you build confidence. Yeah, I think
language models are also just really
weird, right? Like with the emergent
misalignment
work they I I don't know if they took
predictions they should have of like,
hey, I'm going to fine-tune chatbt on
code vulnerabilities. Is it going to
become a Nazi? And I think most people
would have said no. And that's what
happened. And so what are the different
How did they discover that it became a
Nazi? They started asking it a ton of
different questions and it will do all
sorts of like vile and harmful things.
like the whole persona just totally
changes and and I mean we are dealing
with alien brains here who don't have
the social norms of humans and or or
even a clear notion of like what they
have and haven't learned uh that that
that we have of them. I mean and and so
I think you really want to go into this
with with eyes wide open. Backing up for
me, uh, if you live in a world where AI
progress accelerates,
um, by the way, you were mentioning a
little while ago that there's many wild
worlds we could be living in, but we're
living at least one of them. Um, another
one that we've uh, gestured at, but it's
worth making more explicit is this. Even
if the AI models are not helping write
the next training algorithm for their
successor, just the fact that if they
had human level learning efficiency, uh
whatever a model is learning on the job
or whatever copy of the model is
learning on the job, the whole model is
learning. So in effect, it's getting or
if they're like a thousand times less
efficient than humans are learning.
That's right. And you just like deployed
them even still. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah.
Anyways, and and there's a whole bunch
of other things you can think about, but
e even there it's like you kind of have
like a broadly deployed intelligence
explosion and I do think it's worth like
worth pressing on that future of um you
know there is this whole spectrum of
crazy futures but the one that I feel
we're almost guaranteed to get and this
is like a like a almost a strong
statement to make um is one where like
at the very least you get drop in like
white collar
worker at some point in the next 5
years. It's like I think it's very
likely in two. Um but it seems almost
overdetermined in like five and and on
like the grand scheme of things like
those are kind of irrelevant time frames
like it's the same either way. Um and
that completely changes the world over
the next decade. Um and and if the sort
of if we don't have the right policies
in place for that then you end up
actually with almost in some respects
like a fundamentally worse world because
the thing that these models get good at
by default is like software engineering
and like computer using agents and this
kind of stuff and then we need to we
will need to put in extra effort to put
them in the loops where they help us
with scientific research or they're like
we have the right robotics such that we
actually like experience an increase in
material quality of life. Um, so that's
worth thinking about like if you're in
the perspective of like I'm a country
like what should I be doing or thinking
about uh like plan for the case where
where white collar work is automatable
um and then consider what does that mean
for your economy and what you should be
doing to prepare policy what should you
be doing to prepare cuz honestly
honestly it's like such a tough question
where like if you're India or Nigeria or
Australia
um if you're a country unlike uh America
or China where they do have frontier
models
What is it that you should be doing
right now especially on such a short
time scale? Yes. Uh so I think one very
important point is that let's say this
scenario turns out true then compute
becomes the most valuable resource in
the world like the sort of GDP of your
economy is dramatically affected by how
much compute you can deploy towards the
sort of organizations within your
country. Um and so having some uh
guaranteed amount of compute I think
will actually be quite important. So
like pre getting ahead of investments in
like data centers and this kind of stuff
on the condition that it's like
companies in your country have to be
allowed to to use that compute. Um yeah
not necessarily for training but like
just even just for inference like I
think the economic value here comes from
inference. Um I think it also makes
sense to invest broadly in uh in AI like
I think these countries have the
opportunity to do so and I think that's
like a portfolio of like you know
foundation model companies but also like
robotic supply chain and this kind of
stuff. Um I think that you should invest
very proactively in policies that try
and pre like prevent capital lock in.
Um, so we're in for a much worse world
if like it just so happens that the
people who had like money in the stock
exchange or in land before AGI are like
dramatically more wealthy than the
people who don't because it's a gross
misallocation of resources. Uh, so
having like I know one of my favorite
episodes actually on your podcast was
like the Georgeism one where you kind of
like like appropriately like value
allocate land. Um and so I think I think
like this strikes particularly close to
home coming from Australia where I think
like our like uh policies with respect
to land are like grossly wrong. Um but I
think this is broadly true. Um
being very uh like forward on regulation
of integration of these models into uh
into like your country um is is
important. Um and proactively uh making
sure that people have choice like so
let's say uh you should be like quite
proactive about making sure that like
the phones or devices or like glasses
that people have people have like free
choice on like what things they run.
[Music]
Um and then so that's like that's the we
just get white collar worker right and
like you're trying to like do the best
to like prepare your country for that.
Um and then it's like okay well what can
you do to like make all possible
versions of the future go like well like
that's like covering some amount of like
economic downside. Uh the other like
things I think are really important is
like figure out how you can uh
like either make the like basically
ensure dramatic upside or cover uh like
terrible downside. Um and so like
getting dramatic upside is like making
sure that there like is investment in bi
like biology research and this kind of
stuff in an automated way that is like
uh these models are actually like able
to produce novel medicines that mass
like massively improve our like quality
of life and covering the downside is
like AI alignment research and this kind
of stuff and automated testing and like
really thinking hard about that AI
safety institutes this kind of stuff.
But these seem like things that a rich
person a random rich person could also
do like there's it seems like
There's not a thing that a nation state
is uniquely equipped to do. That's a
good point. In this in this scenario, I
mean like dramatic allocation of res of
like resource towards compute I think is
is sensible. Um I would be doing that if
I was in charge of a nation state. I
think it just increases your optionality
in like most of the future worlds. Um
Dylan Patel has some scary forecasts on
US energy versus China. Yes. Yeah. We're
like 34 gawatt off. Yeah. Yeah. The US's
line is like flat basically and China's
line is like this and I mean the US like
very clearly yeah we just need so many
more power plants. Yes. If intelligence
becomes this like incredibly valuable
input like a intelligence becomes almost
a raw input into the economies and
quality of life of future. Um the thing
directly underneath that is energy. Um
and so making sure that you have like
you know incredible amounts of solar
like tile the desert in solar panels you
know some parts of the desert in solar
panels um would be would be helpful
towards making sure that you have uh
more access to intelligence on top.
Yeah, ju just to make it explicit
because we've been touching on it here.
Even if AI progress totally stalls or
you think that the models are really
spiky and they don't have general
intelligence, it's so economically
valuable and sufficiently easy to
collect data on all of these different
jobs, these white collar job tasks such
that to Shalto's point, we will we
should expect to see them automated
within the next 5 years. Yeah. Even if
you need to hand spoon every single task
to the model, it's like economically
worthwhile to do. So even if like
algorithmic like progress stalls out and
like we just never figure out how to
like keep progress going, which I don't
think is the case, like it that hasn't
stalled out yet. It seems to be going
great. Um the current suite of
algorithms are sufficient to automate
white color work provided you have
enough of the right kinds of data. Yes.
and in a way that like compared to the
TAM of salaries for all of those kinds
of work is so like trivally worthwhile.
Yeah, exactly. Uh I I do just want to
flag as well that there's a really
dystopian future if you take more of X
paradox to its extreme which is this
paradox where we think that the most
valuable things that humans can do or
the smartest things are like add large
numbers in our heads or do any sort of
white collar work and then we totally
take for granted our fine motor skill
and coordination. But from an
evolutionary perspective it's the
opposite. So, uh, we got like evolution
has optimized fine motor coordination so
well and even if you look at like robot
hands or like even the ability to open a
door is still just like really hard for
robots. Um, meanwhile, we're seeing this
total automation of coding and
everything else that we've seen as
clever. The the really scary future is
one in which AIs can do everything
except for the physical robotic tasks.
in which case you'll have humans with
like AirPods and like glasses glasses
and there'll be some robot overlord
controlling the human through cameras by
just like telling it what to do and like
having a bounding box around the thing
you're supposed to pick up and so you
have like human meat robots um and and
not like necessarily saying that like
that's what the AIs would be like want
to do or anything like that but as in
like if you were to be like what are the
relative economic value of things like
the AIS are out there doing computer
programming and like the most valuable
thing that humans can do is like be
amazing robots. Um, now that being said,
I think more of paradox is a little bit
fake. Um, I think the main reason that
robots are worse than uh at like being a
robot than they are at software
engineering is the internet exists for
software engineering. Uh, like GitHub
exists and uh there is no equivalent
thing like if you had
um all like you know moap of everyone's
actions as they were like going about
their daily lives um for like some
reasonable fraction of the human
population. Robotics is also like close
to solved like like like on track to be
solved at the same rate that software
engineering is on track to be solved. Um
so this is only like this vision is only
like a sort of decade long section but
it's still pretty terrible decade. Like
imagine the world where uh people have
lost their jobs. You haven't yet got
novel biological research that means
like people's quality of life is like
dramatically better. you don't yet have
material abundance because uh you like
haven't actually been able to action
like action the physical world um in the
like necessary way. Like you can't build
dramatically more um because that's like
building dramatically more takes robots
basically. Um and people's like main
comparative advantage is uh as fantastic
robots is like a shocking shocking
world. I mean from the perspective of an
average human I think it actually might
be better. your like wages will be
higher because you're you're the
complement to something that is
enormously valuable, right? Which is AI
labor, right? Um and like you know a
decade or two on like the world is
fantastic, right? Like you truly like
robotics is solved and you decide to get
like you know like radical abundance
basically. um provided that you have all
the policies set up like necessary to
permit building like you sort of you end
up with that same change from you know
the like the the before and after photos
of Shanghai where like 20 years on it's
just like this dramatically transformed
city like a lot of places in the world
probably end up like that right um over
that two decade period but we need to
make sure like one do our best to
estimate is this actually what is on
track to happen like build sweet bench
but for all the other forms of white
collar and measure and track. That's a
great thing that government should be
doing by the way is like trying to break
down the sort of functions of their
economy into measurable tasks and
figuring out where what does the curve
actually look like for that because they
might be a bit shocked by uh the
progress there. um you know there's no
sweet bench for tax uh like tax eval um
and uh
then and I don't like have all the
answers here but like figuring out a way
to like share the proceeds of this
economy like broadly across people or
like invest heavily in robotics and
collecting the data so that we get
robotics faster we get material
abundance faster invest in biological
research that we get but like all that
faster they basically try and pull
forward the radical upside um because
because otherwise you have a pretty dark
yeah section. I think one thing that's
not appreciated enough is how much of
our leverage on the future, given the
fact that our labor isn't going to be
worth that much, comes from our economic
and political system surviving. Mhm. Um,
for your millionxed S&P equity to mean
something, for uh your contracts to mean
anything, for the government to be able
to tax the AI labor and give you a UBI
off of that. It just like that requires
our legal institutions, our economic
institutions, our financial rail
surviving into the future. Yes. The way
in which that likely happens is if it's
also in the AI's best interests that
they follow those rails. And by AI, I
don't mean some monolithic single AI. I
just mean like firms which are employing
AI and becoming more productive as a
result. Um you don't want to be in a
position where it's so ownorous to
operate in our system that you're
basically selecting for firms who either
immigrate or who are like doing black
market stuff etc. And which means I
think like you want to make it super
super easy to deploy AI uh have the
equivalent of special economic zones
etc. Um because otherwise you are just
surrendering the future. Yeah. Outside
of any control that you might have on
it. Um one of the reasons by the way
that I worry about uh turning AGI into a
national security issue or having it
have extremely close ties with the
government, the Manhattan Project thing
is that it disproportionately redirects
the use of AI towards military tech and
the mosquito drones and whatever. Um and
and also naturally puts other countries
in the same frame of mind, right? If
we're developing the mosquito drones,
why would China not develop the mosquito
drones? Um and that just seems like a
zero sum race and not to mention a
potentially catastrophic one. Yes.
Whereas like, you know, like compute
will be limited. You know, we we want we
we will need to disproportionately
accelerate some things. To the extent it
just remains totally like a consumer
free market um landscape, it just seems
more likely that we'll get the glorious
transhumanist future where they're
developing the things that make human
life better. Yes, I I mean I agree like
the the case where you end up with like
two national projects facing off against
each other is dramatically worse, right?
Uh like we don't want to live in that
world. Yeah. Uh it's much much better if
this like stays a free market, so to
speak. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I want to
take issue with your claim that even if
with the with the algorithms of today,
if we just collect enough data, yeah,
that we could automate white color work.
First, let me get an understanding of
what you mean by that. So, do you mean
that we would do the analogous thing of
free training with all the trajectories
of everything people do on their jobs?
Could you um could you make either
manually or through some other process
uh some RL procedure based on the screen
recordings of every white color worker?
What kind of thing are you imagining? I
mean like a continuous distribution of
this stuff. Uh one like important like
mental model to think about RL is I
think as like the the task gets more
there is some respect with which like
longer horizon or better at that task if
you can do them if you can get that
reward ever are like easier to judge. Um
so like again this comes back to like
can you make money on the internet
that's an incredibly easy reward signal
uh to judge. Uh but to like do that
there's like a whole hierarchy of like
complex behavior. So if you could like
pre-train up to the easy to judge reward
signals like does your website work?
Does it go down? Like did people like
it? Like there's there's all these
reward signals that we can respond to
because we have a long we can like
progress through these long enough
trajectories to actually like get to
interesting things. If you're stuck in
this regime where like you need a reward
signal every five tokens like it's a way
more painful and like long process. But
if you could like pre-train on every
like screen in America, um then probably
the like RL tasks that you can design
are very different to like if you could
only like take the existing internet as
it is today. Um and so like how much of
that you get access to like changes the
the mix. Interesting. So, as we're
training them on longer and longer
horizon tasks and it takes longer for
them to get any any signal on whether
they successfully complete the task,
will that slow down progress because it
takes more compute per per task? I do
think there's this notion the longer the
harder tasks, the more training is
required. And I'm sympathetic to that
naively, but we as humans are very good
at practicing the hard parts of tasks
and and decomposing them. And I think
once models get good enough at the basic
stuff, they can just rehearse or fast
forward to the more difficult parts. I
mean that's definitely one of the big
complexities, right? Like as you use
more compute and like the and as you
train like more and more difficult
tasks. I mean uh I don't know your rate
of improvement at biology is going to be
like somewhat bound by the time it takes
a cell to grow um in a way that your
rate of improvement on math isn't for
example.
Um so
yes but I think for many things we'll be
able to parallelize far like widely
enough and and get enough iteration
loops. Yeah. Um will will the um the
regime of training new models go away?
Will will we eventually get to like you
you've got the model and then you just
keep adding more skills to it with RL
training? That depends on uh whether or
not you think like there's a virtue in
pre-training a new architecture.
basically you make some like
architectural change uh then you like
probably need to like do some form of
like at least like retraining a new
model. How does the fact that um
if RL requires a bunch of inference to
do the training in the first place does
that push against the thing you were
talking about where we actually need a
bigger model in order to have brain-like
energy. Um but then also it's more
expensive to train it in RL. So where
does that balance out? I think we got to
drink the bitter lesson here. And yeah,
like you there aren't infinite
shortcuts. Like you do just have to
scale and have a bigger model and pay
more inference for it. And if you yeah,
if you want AGI, then that's what you
got to got to pay the price of. But but
there's like there's a trade-off
equation here, right, of like uh there
is science to do which you know everyone
is doing of what is the optimal point at
which to do RL um because you need
something which can both learn uh and
discover the sparse reward itself. So
you don't want a one parameter model.
Useless even though you can run it
really fast. Um you also don't want you
know like 100T model because like super
slow. Yeah. Possible RL. So um and like
the sort of the the marginal benefit of
like its learning efficiency is like not
worth it, right? So there's like a
there's a predier here like what's the
optimal model size at like your current
class of capabilities and like your
current set of RL environments and this
kind of stuff. Yeah. And and even in the
last year there's been much more of a
factor of the inference cost, right? So
just explicitly like the bigger the
model the more expensive it is to do a
forward pass and generate tokens. And
the calculus used to just be should I
allocate my flops to more training data
or a bigger model. And now another huge
factor is how much am I actually going
to do forward passes on this model once
it's trained. Yeah. My total pool of
like compute. How do I allocate that
across train data compute and inference
compute for the RL training? And then
even within inference there's all this
research on well what strategy should I
use? Should I sample 10 and take the
best? Do I do this sort of like
branching search, etc., etc. And so with
RL where you're sampling a whole lot of
tokens, you also need to factor in the
ability for the model to like actually
generate those tokens and then and then
learn and get feedback. Okay. So if
we're living in this world, what is your
advice to somebody early in their career
or a student in college? How should they
be uh what should they be planning on
doing? Yeah. Um so I think once again
there's like it's worth considering the
spectrum of possible worlds and
preparing yourself for that and the one
like the sort of action that I think is
like highest EV in that case is you are
about to get dramatic in the at a
minimum you are about to get
dramatically more leverage you already
have like already the startups in YC
like you know writing huge amounts of
their code with uh you know claude um so
what challenges what causes do you want
to change in the world with that added
leverage like if you had 10 engineers
um at your beck and call what would you
do or if you had a company at your beck
and call like what would that enable you
to do and what problems and domains
suddenly become tractable that's the
world you want to prepare for now that
still requires a lot of technical depth
obviously there is the case where AI
just becomes dramatically better than
like everyone at everything right but
for at least a while probably there is
like advantage I think Jensen actually
talked about this in an interview in an
interesting way where he's like you know
I have like 100 thousand general
intelligences around me and I'm still
like somewhat useful um because I'm
there like you know directing the values
and like like asking them to do things
and you know they're still like there I
still have value even though I have
100,000 general intelligences and for
many people I think that will still be
true for a fair while um and then you
know as the AI get better and better and
better and like so on eventually no but
uh again prepare for like the spectrum
of possible worlds because in the event
where we're just totally out competed
yeah doesn't matter what you do but in
all the other worlds matters a lot get
the technical depth study biology study
CS like really think hard about study
physics think about hard about what
challenges you want to solve in the
world. Yeah, that's a lot of topics.
You can now you can, right? Like it's so
much easier to learn. Everyone, you
know, everyone now has the like infinite
perfect tutor. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
It's definitely been helpful to me.
Yeah. I would say some combination of
like get rid of the sunk cost of your
like previous workflows or expertise
uh in order to evaluate what AI can do
for you. That's right. Um, and and
another way to put this, which is fun,
is just like be lazier in so much as
like figure out the way that the agent
can do the things that are toilsome. Um,
but but it's you're going to have to in
this you ultimately you get to be
lazier, but in the short run, you need
to like critically think about the
things you're currently doing and like
what an AI could actually be better at
doing and then go and try it or explore
it. uh because I think there's like
still just a lot of lowhanging fruit of
people assuming uh and not writing the
full prompt giving a few examples
connecting the right tools um for for
your work to be accelerated automated.
Yeah. Yeah. Um there's also uh the sunk
cost of feeling like since you're not
quote unquote early to AI that you've
sort of missed the boat and you can't
like but I I think I mean I remember
when GPT3 came out so backstory on the
podcast when I graduated college I was
planning on doing some sort of AI rapper
startup um and the podcast was just like
a gateway into doing that and so I was
trying out like different things and at
the time I remember thinking oh 3.5 is
out and people like I'm like so behind
on like the startup scene here or
whatever if I wanted to make my own
rapper. Um I mean maybe the idea of the
rapper was inadvisable in the first
place but just like I every time feels
early because like it's sort of if it's
an exponentially growing process. Um and
there were many things many ideas are
only becoming possible now right so
exactly that product exponential I
talked about before like products
literally obsoleted like you need to
constantly reinvent yourself to stay at
the like frontier of capabilities. By
the way, do you remember I had a really
shitty idea and I gave you a call. I
don't know what it was. It was it was
like um I think it was like rag for like
lawyers or something. Yeah. Anyways, I
give you I think one of our first
interactions was I'm like, "Hey, what do
you think of this idea?" And you're
like, "I think the podcast sounds
promising."
Which I appreciate. Yeah. I I got
slightly annoyed at a a friend recently
who I think is really talented and
clever and interested in AI but has
pursued a biology route and I just kind
of tried to shake them of like you can
work on AI if you want to. Um I mean I I
I think humans are artificial not
artificial are biological general
intelligences where a lot of the things
of value are just very general. Yeah.
And whatever kind of specialization that
you've done maybe just doesn't matter
that much. I mean again it cost but like
so many of the people even my like
colleagues at anthropic are excited
about AI and they just don't let their
previous career be a blocker. Um and
because they're just like innately
smart, talented, driven, whatever else,
they're they end up being very
successful and finding roles. It's not
as if they were in AI forever. I mean,
people have come from totally different
fields. Uh, and so don't think that you
need like permission from some abstract
entity to like get involved and apply
and be able to contribute. If um if
somebody wanted to be an a researcher
like right now, if you could give them
an open problem or like this the kind of
open problem that is very likely to be
the
um be quite impressive, what would it
be?
Uh, I think that now that RL's like come
back,
um, papers building on Andy Jones's like
scaling board like scaling walls for
board games are interesting. Um, like
showing that you can uh, like
investigating these questions like the
ones you asked before where you're like,
oh, like you know, is the model actually
learning to do more than its previous
pass at K or is it just like discovering
that like exploring questions like that
deeply I think are interesting. Yeah.
Yeah. Like scaling laws for RL
basically. very curious to see like how
much uh uh like the marginal increase in
metalarning from a new task or
something. I mean on that note I think I
think model diffing has like a bunch of
opportunities. Yeah. Um also people say
oh we're not capturing all the features
there's all this stuff left on the
table. What is that stuff that's left on
the table? Yeah. Um like if the model's
jailbroken is it using existing features
that you've identified? Is it only using
the error terms that you haven't
captured? Yeah. Um I don't know. There's
a lot here. I think Matts is great. Uh
the anthropic fellowship has been going
really well. Um Goodfire Anthropic
invested in recently. They're doing a
lot of interpretability work or just
apply anything to anything to get your
equity up. Huh.
There's just so many interpretability
projects that are are like there's so
much low hanging fruit and we need more
people and I don't think we have much
time. Yeah. Uh I also want to make a
plug for performance engineering. Um I
think this is one of the like like best
ways to to sort of demonstrate that you
have like the raw ability to to do it
like if you made a extremely efficient
transformer implementation on TPU or
trrenium or like in CUDA uh
then I think there's a pretty high
likelihood that you'll get a job offer.
Um like there's a relatively small pool
of people that you can trust to like
completely own end to end the
performance of a of a model. Um and and
if you have broad deep electrical
engineering skills, I think you can
probably come up to speed pretty fast on
accelerator stuff. Yeah, you can come up
to speed like reasonably fast. Um and it
teaches you a lot of good intuitions of
the actual intricacies of what's going
on in the models, which means that
you're then very well placed to like
think about architecture and this kind
of stuff. Um one of my favorite people
uh in thinking about architecture and
anthropic at the moment actually like
came from like a heavy GPU kernel
programming background, just like knows
the ins and outs really deeply and can
think about the trade-offs really well.
Um, this is fun, guys. Awesome. Thanks.
Yeah, great to be back. I hope you
enjoyed this episode. If you did, the
most helpful thing you can do is just
share it with other people who you think
might enjoy it. Send it to your friends,
your group chats, Twitter, wherever
else. Just let the word go forth. Other
than that, super helpful if you can
subscribe on YouTube and leave a
fivestar review on Apple Podcasts and
Spotify. Check out the sponsors in the
description below. If you want to
sponsor a future episode, go to
dwarcash.com/advertise. Thank you for
tuning in. I'll see you on the next one.
[Music]

- The following is a
conversation with Elon Musk,
his fourth time on this,
the Lex Fridman Podcast.
(Elon whistling)
I thought you were gonna finish it.
(Elon whistling)
It's one of the greatest
themes in all film history.
(whistling continues)
- Yeah, that's great.
- So I was just thinking
about the Roman Empire.
As one does.
(Elon laughing)
- There's that whole meme where old guys
are thinking about the Roman
Empire at least once a day.
- And half the population's confused
whether it's true or not.
But more seriously thinking about the wars
going on in the world today.
And as you know, war and military conquest
has been a big part of
Roman society and culture.
And it, I think, has been
a big part of most empires
and dynasties throughout
human history, so.
- Yeah, they usually came
as a result of conquest.
I mean, there's some,
like the Hungarian Empire
where there was just a lot
of sort of clever marriages.
- But fundamentally there's
an engine of conquest.
They celebrate excellence in warfare.
Many of the leaders
were excellent generals.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- That kind of thing.
So a big picture question, Grok approved,
I asked if this is a good question to ask.
- [Elon] Get tested Grok approved.
- Yeah.
At least on fun mode.
(Elon laughing)
To what degree do you think
war is part of human nature
versus a consequence of
how human societies are structured?
I ask this as you have
somehow controversially
been a proponent of peace.
- I'm generally a proponent of peace.
I mean, ignorance is perhaps,
in my view, the real
enemy to be countered.
That's the real hard part.
Not, you know, fighting other humans.
But all creatures fight.
I mean, the jungle is a,
you look at the, people
think of this nature
as perhaps some sort of peaceful thing.
But in fact it is not.
There's some quite funny
Werner Herzog thing
where he is like in the jungle,
like saying that it's
like basically just murder
and death in every direction.
I mean, the plants, animals in the jungle
are constantly trying to kill each other,
every single day, every minute.
So it's not like, you know,
we're unusual in that respect.
- Well, there's a relevant question here.
Whether with greater intelligence
comes greater control
over these base instincts for violence.
- Yes.
We have much more
vulnerability to control our
limbic instinct for violence
than say a chimpanzee.
And in fact, if one looks and say,
chimpanzee society, it is not friendly.
I mean, the Bonobos are an exception,
but chimpanzee society
is filled with violence.
And it's quite, quite horrific, frankly,
that that's our limbic system in action.
Like, you don't wanna be on
the wrong side of a chimpanzee,
they'll eat your face off
and tear and nuts off.
- Yeah, basically, there's
no limits or ethics
or there almost had just war.
There's no just war in
chimpanzee societies,
is war and dominance
by any means necessary.
- Yeah, chimpanzee society is a pro,
like a permanent version of human society.
They're not like peace
loving basically at all.
There's extreme violence.
And then once in a while,
somebody who's watched
too many Disney movies
decides to raise a chimpanzee as a pet,
and then that eats their
face or rip their nuts off
or chew their fingers off
and that kind of thing.
It's happened several times.
- Ripping your nuts off is an interesting
strategy for interaction.
- It's happened to
people. It's unfortunate.
Like that's, I guess a one way to ensure
that the other chimp
doesn't like, you know,
contribute to the gene pool.
- Well, from a martial arts perspective
is the fascinating strategy.
- (laughing) The nut riper. (laughing)
- I wonder which of the
martial arts teaches that one.
- I think it's safe to say
if somebody's got your nuts
in their hands and as the
option ripping them off,
you'll be amenable to whatever they want.
- Yeah.
(Elon laughing)
- So like I said, somehow controversially,
you've been an proponent
of peace on Twitter, on X.
- Yeah.
- So let me ask you about
the wars going on today
and to see what the
path to peace could be.
How do you hope the current war in Israel
and Gaza comes to an end?
What path do you see
that can minimize human suffering
in the long term in
that part of the world?
- Well, I think that part of
the world is definitely like,
if you look up the,
there is no easy answer
in the dictionary.
It'll be that, like the
picture of the Middle East,
in Israel especially.
So there is no easy answer.
What my, this is strictly
my opinion of, you know,
is that the goal
of Hamas was to provoke an
overreaction from Israel.
They obviously did not
expect to, you know,
have a military victory, but they expect,
they really wanted to
commit the worst atrocities
that they could in order to provoke
the most aggressive response
possible from Israel.
And then leverage that aggressive response
to rally Muslims worldwide
for the course of Gaza and Palestine,
which they have succeeded in doing.
So the counterintuitive thing here,
I think that the thing that
I think should be done,
even though it's very difficult,
is that I would recommend that Israel
engage in the most conspicuous
acts of kindness possible.
Every po- everything.
That is the actual thing
that we're taught the goal of Hamas.
- So in some sense,
the degree that makes sense in geopolitics
turn the other cheek implemented.
- It's not exactly turn the other cheek.
Because I do think that there's, you know,
I think it is appropriate for Israel
to find the Hamas members
and, you know, either kill
'em or incarcerate them.
Like that's something that's
something has to be done
'cause they're just gonna
keep coming otherwise.
But in addition to that, they
need to do whatever they can.
There's some talk of establishing,
for example, a mobile hospital.
I'd recommend doing that.
Just making sure that, you know,
there's food, water, medical, necessities,
and just be over the top about it
and be very transparent.
So you can't claim it's a trick.
Like just put webcam on the
thing, you know, or 24/7.
- Deploy acts of kindness.
- Yeah.
Conspicuous acts of kindness that,
with that are unequivocal.
Meaning they can't be somehow,
because Hamas will then,
their response will be, oh, it's a trick.
Therefore you have to
counter how it's not a trick.
- This ultimately fights the broader force
of hatred in the region.
- Yes.
And I'm not sure who said it,
it's an apocryphal saying,
but an eye for an eye
makes everyone blind.
Now that neck of the woods,
they really believe in the
whole eye for an eye thing.
But I mean, you really have,
if you're not gonna just
outright commit genocide,
like against an entire people,
which obviously would not
be acceptable to really
shouldn't be acceptable to anyone,
then you're gonna leave
basically a lot of people alive
who subsequently, you know, hate Israel.
So really the question is like,
how, for every Hamas member that you kill,
how many did you create?
And if you create more than you killed,
you've not succeeded.
That's the, you know,
the real situation there.
And it's safe to say that if, you know,
if you kill somebody's child in Gaza,
you've made at least a few Hamas members
who will die just to kill an Israeli.
That's the situation.
So, but I mean,
this is one of the most
contentious subjects
one could possibly discuss.
But I think if the goal ultimately
is some sort of long-term peace,
one has to be, look at this
from the standpoint of,
over time, are there more or
fewer terrorists being created?
- Let me just linger on war.
- Yeah, war safe to say,
wars always existed and always will exist.
- [Lex] Always will exist,
- Always has existed
and always will exist.
- I hope not. You think it always will?
- There will always be war.
This question of just how much war.
And, you know, there's this,
there's this sort of the
scope and scale of war.
But to imagine that there
would not be any war
in the future, I think would
be a very unlikely outcome.
- Yeah you talked about
the Culture series.
There's war even there.
- Yes. It's a giant war.
The first book starts off
with a gigantic galactic war
where trillions die, trillions.
- But it still nevertheless
protects these pockets
of flourishing.
Somehow you can have galactic war
and still have pockets of flourishing.
- Yeah.
I mean it's, I guess if we
are able to one day expand to,
you know, the galaxy or whatever,
there will be a galactic
war at some point.
- The scale, I mean the scale
of war has been increasing,
increasing, increasing.
It's like a race between
the scale of suffering
and the scale of flourishing.
- Yes.
- A lot of people seem
to be using this tragedy
to beat the drums of war
and feed the military industrial complex.
Do you worry about this?
The people who are rooting for escalation
and how can it be stopped?
- One of the things that did concerned me
is that there are very
few people alive today
who actually viscerally
understand the horrors of war,
at least in the US.
I mean, obviously there are
people in on the front lines
in Ukraine and Russia who understand
just how terrible war is,
but how many people in
the west understand it?
And my grandfather was in World War II.
He was severely traumatized.
He was there, I think for
almost six years in the,
in eastern North Africa and Italy.
All his friends were
killed in front of him.
And he would've died too,
except they randomly gave some,
I guess, IQ test or something.
And he scored very high.
And he was not an officer, he was a,
I think a corporal or a
sergeant or something like that.
Because he didn't finish high school
because he had to drop outta high school,
'cause his dad died and he had to work
to support his siblings.
So because he didn't graduate high school,
he was not eligible for the officer corps.
So, you know, he kind of got
put into the cannon fodder
category, basically.
But then, this, randomly
they gave him this test.
He was transferred to British
intelligence in London.
That's where he met my grandmother.
But he had PTSD next
level, like next level.
I mean, just didn't
talk, just didn't talk.
And if you tried talking to him,
he'd just tell you to shut up.
And he won a bunch of medals.
Never bragged about it once,
not even hinted, nothing.
I like found out about it,
'cause his military records were online.
That's how I know.
So he would say like, no way in hell
do you wanna do that again.
But how many people, now
he obviously he died,
you know, 20 years ago or
longer, actually 30 years ago.
How many people are alive
that remember World War II?
Not many.
- And the same perhaps applies
to the threat of nuclear war.
- Yeah. I mean, there
are enough nuclear bombs
pointed at United States
to make the revel,
the radio active revel balance many times.
- There's two major
wars going on right now.
So you talked about the
threat of AGI quite a bit.
But now as we sit here with the intensity
of conflict going on, do
you worry about nuclear war?
- I think we shouldn't
discount the possibility
of nuclear war.
It is a civilizational threat.
Right now I could be wrong,
but I think the current
probability of nuclear war
is quite low.
But there are a lot of
nukes pointed at us.
So, and we have a lot of
nukes pointed at other people.
They're still there.
Nobody's put their guns away.
The missiles are still in the silos.
- And the leaders don't
seem to be the ones
with the nukes talking to each other.
- No.
There are wars which are tragic
and difficult on a local basis.
And then there are wars
which are civilization ending
or has that potential.
Obviously global thermonuclear
warfare has high potential
to end civilization, perhaps permanently.
But certainly, you know, to severely wound
and perhaps set back human progress by,
you know, to the stone age
or something, I don't know.
Pretty bad.
Probably scientists and
engineers wanna be super popular
after that as well.
And like you got us into this mess.
- So generally I think we
obviously wanna prioritize
civilizational risks over
things that are painful
and tragic on a local level,
but not civilizational.
- How do you hope the war
in Ukraine comes to an end?
And what's the path, once again
to minimizing human suffering there?
- Well, I think that
what is likely to happen,
which is really pretty much the way it is,
is that something very close
to the current lines will be
how a ceasefire or truth happens.
But, you know, you just
have a situation right now
where whoever goes on the
offensive will suffer casualties
at several times the rate
of whoever's on the defense.
'Cause you've got defense in depth,
you've got minefields,
trenches, anti-tank defenses.
Nobody has air superiority.
'cause the anti-aircraft missiles
are really far better than the aircraft.
Like, they're far more of them.
And so neither side has air superiority.
Tanks are basically death
drafts, just slow moving
and they're not immune
to anti-tank weapons.
So you really just have
long range artillery
and infantry ranges.
It's World War I all over
again with drones, you know,
throwing old drones, some drones there.
- Which makes the long range artillery
just that much more accurate and better
and so more efficient at
murdering people on both sides.
- Yeah.
So it's whoever is, you
don't wanna be trying
to advance from either side,
'cause the probability of
dying is incredibly high.
So in order to overcome
defense in depth trenches
and minefields, you
really need a significant
local superiority in numbers.
Ideally combined alms
where you do a fast attack
with aircraft, a
concentrated number of tanks
and a lot of people.
That's the only way you're
gonna punch through the line.
And then you're gonna punch through
and then not have
reinforcements just kick you
right out again.
I mean, I really recommend people read
World War I warfare in detail.
That's rough.
I mean, the sheer number
of people that died there
was mind boggling.
- And it's almost impossible
to imagine the end of it
that doesn't look like almost
exactly like the beginning
in terms of what land
belongs to who and so on.
But on the other side of a
lot of human suffering death
and destruction of infrastructure.
- Yes.
I mean, the thing that, the reason I,
you know, proposed some sort of truce
or peace a year ago
was because I've predicted
pretty much exactly
what would happen, which
is a lot of people dying
for basically almost no changes in land.
And this, the loss of the flower
of Ukrainian and Russian youth.
And we should have some
sympathy for the Russian boys
as well as the Ukrainian boys,
'cause they, Russian boys didn't ask to be
on their front line, they have to be.
So there's a lot of sons not
coming back to their parents,
you know, and I think most
of 'em don't really have,
they don't hate the other side.
You know, it's sort of like
as this saying about, like,
this saying comes from World
War I, it's like young boys
who don't know each
other, killing each other
on behalf of old men
that do know each other.
The hell's the point of that?
- So Vladimir Zelensky said that he's not,
or has said in the past,
he's not interested in
talking to Putin directly.
Do you think he should?
- Yeah.
- Sit down man to man,
lead a leader and negotiate peace?
- Look, I think I would just recommend
do not send the flower of Ukrainian youth
to die in trenches.
Whether he talks to Putin
or not, just don't do that.
Whoever goes on the offensive
will lose massive numbers of people
and history will not
look kindly upon them.
- You've spoken honestly
about the possibility of war
between US and China in the long term.
If no diplomatic solution
is found, for example,
on the question of Taiwan
and one China policy.
- [Elon] Right.
- How do we avoid the trajectory
where these two superpowers clash?
- Well, it's worth reading that book
on the, difficult to
pronounce, the Thucydides trap,
I believe it's called.
I love war history. I like
inside out and backwards.
There's hardly a battle
I haven't read about.
And trying to figure out like
what really was the cause
of victory in any
particular case as opposed
to what one side or
another claim the reason.
- Both the victory and
what sparked the war?
- Yeah, yeah,
- [Lex] The whole thing.
- Yeah, so that Athens and
Sparta is a classic case.
The thing about the Greek is
they really wrote down a lot of stuff.
They loved writing.
You know, there are lots
of interesting things
that happened in many parts of the world,
but people didn't write down. (laughing)
So we don't know what happened,
or they didn't really
write with in detail.
They just would say like,
we had a battle and we won.
And like, well what?
Can you add a bit more?
The Greeks, they really
wrote a lot. (laughing)
They were very articulate
on, they just love writing.
So, and we have a bunch of
that writing as preserved.
So we know what led up
to the Peloponnesian War
between the Spartan and Athenian alliance.
And we know that they saw it coming.
I mean, the Spartans didn't write,
they also weren't very
verbose by their nature,
but they did write, but
they weren't very verbose.
They were terse.
But the Athenians and the
other Greeks wrote a line
and they were like, and
Sparta was really kinda
like the leader of Greece.
But Athens grew stronger
and stronger with each passing year.
And everyone's like,
well that's inevitable
that there's gonna be a clash
between Athens and Sparta.
Well, how do we avoid that?
And they couldn't.
They actually, they saw it coming
and they still could
not avoid it. (laughing)
So, you know, at some point
if there's, if one group,
one civilization or country
or whatever exceeds another,
sort of, like, you know,
the United States has been the
biggest kid on the block for,
since I think around 1890
from an economic standpoint.
So the United States
has been the economic,
most powerful economic
engine in the world,
longer than anyone's been alive.
And the foundation of war is economics.
So now we have a situation in the case
of China where the economy
is likely to be two,
perhaps three times larger
than that of the US.
So imagine you're the
biggest kid on the block
for as long as anyone can remember.
And suddenly a kid comes
along who's twice your size.
- So we see it coming.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- How is it possible to stop?
Is there some, let me
throw something out there,
just intermixing of
cultures understanding.
There does seem to be a giant cultural gap
in understanding of each other.
And you're an interesting case study
because you are an American,
obviously you've done
a lot of incredible manufacture
here in the United States,
but you also work with China.
- I've spent a lot of time in China
and met with the leadership many times.
- Maybe a good question to ask is,
what are some things about China
that people don't understand
positive, just in the culture?
What's some interesting things
that you've learned about the Chinese?
- Well, the sheer number of really smart,
hardworking people in China is incredible.
There are really, say like how many smart,
hardworking people are there in China,
there's far more of them
there than there are here.
I think in my opinion.
And they've got a lot of energy.
So I mean, the architecture in China
that's in recent years is far
more impressive than the US.
I mean the train stations, the buildings,
the high speed rail, everything,
it's really far more impressive
than what we have in the US.
I mean, I recommend
somebody just go to Shanghai
and Beijing, look at the buildings
and go to, you know, take the
train from Beijing to Xian,
where you have the terracotta warriors.
China's got an incredible
history, very long history.
And you know, I think arguably the,
in terms of the use of language
from a written standpoint,
sort of one of the oldest,
perhaps the oldest written language.
And then China, people
did write things down.
So now China historically has always been,
with rare exception,
been internally focused.
They have not been inquisitive.
They've fought each other.
There've been many, many civil wars.
In the three kingdoms war,
I believe they lost about
70% of their population.
So, and that,
so they've had brutal internal wars,
like civil wars that make the US Civil War
look small by comparison.
So I think it's important to appreciate
that China is not monolithic.
We sort of think of like China
as this sort of one entity of one mind.
And this is definitely not the case
from what I've seen,
and I think most people who
understand China would agree.
People in China think about China
10 times more than they think
about anything outside of China.
So it's like 90% of
their consideration is,
you know, our is internal.
- Well, isn't that a really positive thing
when you're talking
about the collaboration
and a future piece between superpowers,
when you're inward facing,
which is like focusing
on improving yourself
versus focusing on...
- [Elon] Yeah.
- "Improving" others
through military might.
- The good news, the
history of China suggests
that China is not inquisitive.
Meaning they're not gonna go out
and invade a whole bunch of countries.
Now they do feel very strongly,
you know, so that's good.
I mean, 'cause a lot of
very powerful countries
have been inquisitive.
The US is one of the,
also one of the rare cases
that has not been inquisitive.
Like after World War II,
the US could have basically taken
over the world in any country.
Like, we've got nukes,
nobody else has got nukes.
We don't even have to lose soldiers.
Which country do you want?
And the United States could
have taken over everything.
Oh wait, at will.
And it didn't, and the
United States actually
helped rebuild countries.
So it helped rebuild Europe,
you know, helped rebuild Japan.
This is very unusual behavior,
almost unprecedented.
You know, the US did
conspicuous acts of kindness
like the Berlin airlift, you know?
And I think, you know, it's always like,
well, America's done bad things.
Well, of course America's done bad things.
But one needs to look at
the whole track record.
And just generally, you
know, one sort of test
would be how do you treat
your prisoners at war?
Or let's say, you know,
no offense to the Russians, but
let's say you're in Germany,
it's 1945, you got the
Russian Army coming one side
and you got the French, British,
and American Army's coming the other side.
Who would you like to
be to surrender it to?
Like, no country is like morally perfect,
but I recommend being a
POW with the Americans.
That would be my choice
very strongly. (laughing)
- In the full menu of POWs.
- Very much so.
And in fact, Wernher von Braun, took,
you know, smart guy was like,
we've got to be captured by the Americans.
And in fact, the SS was under
orders to execute Von Braun
and all of the German rocket initiatives.
And they narrowly escaped their SS.
They said they were going
out for a walk in the woods.
They left in the middle
of winter with no coats.
And they ran like, with no
food, no coats, no water.
And just ran like hell and ran west.
And by Sherlock, they, I
think his brother found
like a bicycle or something,
and then just cycled west as fast
as he couldn't have found a US patrol.
So anyway, that's one way
you can tell morality is.
Where do you wanna be PoW? (laughing)
It's not fun anywhere,
but some places are
much worse than others.
So anyways, so like America has been,
while far from perfect,
generally a benevolent force,
and we should always be self-critical
and we try to be better.
But anyone with have brain knows that.
So I think there are some,
in this way China and the
United States are similar.
Neither country has been
acquisitive in a significant way.
So that's like a, you know,
a shared principle I guess.
Now China does feel very
strongly about Taiwan.
They've been very clear
about that for a long time.
You know, from their standpoint,
it would be like one of
the states is, you know,
not there like Hawaii
or something like that.
But more significant
than Hawaii, you know?
And Hawaii is pretty significant for us.
So they view it as really the,
that there's a fundamental part of China.
The islander Formosa not Taiwan,
that is not part of China, but should be.
And the only reason it hasn't been
is 'cause the US Pacific Fleet.
- And as their economic power grows
and as their military power grows,
the thing that they're clearly saying
is their interest will, you
know, clearly be materialized.
- Yes.
China has been very clear that
they'll incorporate Taiwan
peacefully or militarily,
but that they will incorporate it
from their standpoint is 100% likely.
- You know, something you
said about conspicuous
acts of kindness.
As a geopolitical policy,
it almost seems naive,
but I'd venture to say
that this is probably
the path forward, how you avoid most wars.
Just as you say it, it sounds naive,
but it's kind of brilliant.
If you believe in the goodness
of underlying most of human nature.
It just seems like it
conspicuous acts of kindness
can reverberate through the populace
of the countries involved.
- Yeah, well.
- [Lex] And deescalate.
- Absolutely.
So after World War I,
they made a big mistake.
You know, they basically tried to lump
all of lamb on Germany
and, you know, settled Germany
with impossible reparations.
And, you know, really, there was a lot of,
there was a fair, quite a bit of blame
to go around for World War I,
but they try to, you know,
put it all in Germany.
And that was, that laid
the seeds for World War II.
So it's a lot of people
were not just Hitler,
a lot of people felt wronged
and they wanted vengeance
and they got it.
- [Lex] People don't forget.
- Yeah, you know, you
kill somebody's father
or mother or son, daughter,
they're not gonna forget it.
They'll want vengeance.
So after World War II, they're like, well,
the Treaty of Versailles was
a huge mistake in World War I.
And so this time, instead of,
you know, crushing the losers,
we're actually gonna help
'em with the Marshall Plan
and we're gonna help rebuild Germany.
We're gonna help rebuild
or, you know, Austria
and the other, you know,
Italy and whatnot, so.
And that was the right move.
- There's a, it does feel
like there's a profound truth
to conspicuous acts of kindness
being an antidote to this.
- Something must stop the
cycle of reciprocal violence.
Something must stop it
or it will, you know, it'll never stop.
Just eye for an eye, tooth for tooth,
limb for a limb, life for
a life, forever and ever
- To escape briefly,
the darkness was some
incredible engineering work.
xAI just released Grok AI assistant
that I've gotten a chance to play with.
It's amazing on many levels.
First of all, it's amazing
that a relatively small team
in a relatively short amount
of time was able to develop
this close to state-of-the art system.
Another incredible thing
is there's a regular mode
and there's a fun mode.
- Yeah. I guess I'm to blame
for that one. (laughing)
- I wish, first of all,
I wish everything in life had a fun mode.
- Yeah.
- There's something compelling
beyond just fun about the fun mode
interacting with a large language model.
I'm not sure exactly what it is
'cause I only have had a little
bit of time to play with it.
But it just makes it more interesting,
more vibrant to interact with the system.
- Yeah, absolutely.
Our AI Grok is modeled
after the Hitchhiker's
Guide to the Galaxy,
which is one of my
favorite books, which is,
it's a book on philosophy,
disguises book on humor.
And I would say that
is that forms the basis
of my philosophy, which is that
we don't know the meaning of life,
but the more we can expand the scope
and scale of consciousness,
digital and biological, the
more we're able to understand
what questions to ask about the
answer that is the universe.
So I have a philosophy of curiosity.
- There is generally a
feeling like this AI system
has an outward looking,
like the way you are, like sitting
with a good friend
looking up at the stars,
like the asking pod head, like
questions about the universe,
wondering what it's all about.
The curiosity you talk about.
There's a sense no matter how
mundane the question I ask,
there's a sense of cosmic
grandeur to the whole thing.
- Well we are actually working
hard to have engineering
math, physics answers
that you can count on.
So for the other sort of AIs out there
that these so-called
large language models,
I've not found the
engineering to be reliable.
And the hallucination,
it unfortunately hallucinates most
when you at least want it to hallucinate.
So when you're asking
important difficult questions,
that that's where it tends
to be confidently wrong.
So we're really trying hard to say, okay,
how do we be as grounded as possible
so you can count on the results?
Trace things back to
physics first principles,
mathematical logic.
So underlying the humor is an aspiration
to adhere to the truth of the universe
as closely as possible.
- [Lex] That's really tricky.
- It is tricky.
So that's why, you know,
there's always gonna be
some amount of error,
but we want to aspire to be
as truthful as possible about the answers
with acknowledged error.
So that there was always, you
don't wanna be confidently
wrong, so you're not
gonna be right every time,
but you wanna minimize
how often you're confidently wrong.
And then like I said, once
you can count on the logic
as being not violating physics,
then you can start to build on that,
to create inventions, like
invent new technologies.
But if you can't, if you cannot
count on the foundational
physics being correct,
obviously the inventions
are simply wishful thinking,
you know, imagination
land, magic basically.
- Well, as you said, I
think one of the big goals
of xAI is to understand the universe.
- Yes. That's how simple
three word mission. (laughing)
- If you look out far into the future,
do you think on this level of physics,
the very edge of what we
understand about physics,
do you think it will make discoveries,
sort of the sexiest discovery
of them as we know now,
sort of unifying general
relativity and quantum mechanics.
So coming up with a theory of everything,
do you think it could push
towards that direction?
Almost like theoretical
physics discoveries.
- If an AI cannot figure out new physics,
it's clearly not equal to humans,
let alone nor has surpassed humans,
'cause humans have
figured out new physics.
They're just, you know,
physics is just understanding,
you know, deepening wants
insight into how reality works.
And then there's engineering
which is inventing things
that have never existed.
Now the range of
possibilities for engineering
is far greater than for physics.
'Cause you know, once
you figure out the rules
of the universe, that's it.
You've discovered things
that already existed.
But from that you can
then build technologies
with that are really almost limitless
in the variety and cap- you know?
It's like once you understand the rules
of the game properly, and we do, you know,
with current physics, we do
at least at a local level,
understand how physics works very well.
Where our ability to predict
things is incredibly good.
Like quantum mechanics is,
the degree to which quantum
mechanics can predict outcomes
is incredible.
That was my heart hardest
class in college by the way.
My senior quantum
mechanics class was harder
than all of my other classes put together.
- To get an AI system,
a large language model
to reliably, be as reliable
as quantum mechanics
and physics is very difficult.
- Yeah. You have to test any
conclusions against the ground,
truth of reality.
Reality is the ultimate judge.
Like physics is the law,
everything else is a recommendation.
I've seen plenty of people
break the laws made by man,
but none break the laws made by physics.
- Yeah, it's a good test actually.
If this LLM understands
and matches physics, then
you can more reliably trust
whatever it thinks about the current state
of politics in some sense.
- And it's also not the case currently
that even that its internal
logic is not consistent.
So, especially with these,
with the approach of like just
predicting a token, predict,
token, predict, token,
it's like a vector sum.
You know, you're summing
up a bunch of vectors,
but you can get drift.
So as those, a little bit of error,
a little bit of error adds up.
And by the time you are
many tokens down the path,
it doesn't make any sense.
- So it has to be somehow
self-aware about the drift.
- It has to be self-aware about the drift,
and then look at the thing
as a gestalt as a whole
and say it does it have
coherence as a whole.
So, you know, when authors write books
that they will write the
book and then they'll go
and revise it, you know,
taking into account,
you know, all the, the
end and the beginning
and the middle and rewrite
it to achieve coherence
so that it doesn't end up
in a nonsensical place.
- [Lex] Maybe the process
of revising is what...
- Yeah.
- Reasoning is, and then
that's the process of revising
is how you get closer and closer to truth.
Maybe you, like, at least
I approached it that way.
You just say a bunch of bullshit first
and then you get it better.
You start a bullshit and then you get...
- Create a draft and then
you iterate on that draft
until it has has coherence,
until it all adds up basically.
- So another question
about theory of everything,
but for intelligence, do
you think there exists
as you're exploring this with xAI,
creating this intelligence system,
do you think there is a
theory of intelligence
where you get to understand what,
like what is the I in AGI
and what is the I in human intelligence?
- There's no I in Team
America, oh wait, there is.
(both laughing)
- No, it's gonna be stuck in my head now.
(both laughing)
Yeah. There's no me and
whatever in quantum mechanics.
Oh, wait.
(Elon laughing)
I mean is that part of the
process of discovering,
understanding the universe is
understanding intelligence?
- Yeah. Yeah.
I think we need to
understand intelligence,
understand consciousness.
I mean there are some sort of
fundamental questions of like,
what is thought?
What is emotion?
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Is it really just one atom
bumping into another atom?
It feels like something more than that.
So I think we're probably
missing some really big things,
like some really big things.
- Something that'll be
obvious in retrospect.
- [Elon] Yes.
- Like there's a giant,
like you put the whole
consciousness, emotion.
- Well, some people
would quote like a soul,
you know, in religion it'd be a soul.
Like you feel like you're you, right?
I mean, you don't feel like
you're just a collection
of atoms, but on what
dimension does thought exist?
What dimension does do emotions exist?
We feel them very strongly.
I suspect there's more to it
than atoms bumping into atoms.
- And maybe AI can pave
the path to the discovery
of whatever the hell that thing is.
- Yeah. What is consciousness?
Like what are, when you put the
atoms in a particular shape,
why are they able to form thoughts
and take actions, that and feelings.
- And even if it is an illusion,
why is this illusion so compelling?
- Yeah. Like how do...
- Why does this illusion exist?
- [Lex] Yeah.
- On what plain
does this illusion exist?
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And sometimes I wonder is,
you know, either perhaps
everything's conscious
or nothing is conscious, one of the two.
- I like the former,
everything conscious just seems more fun.
- It does seem more more fun. Yes.
But we're composed of atoms
and those atoms are composed
of quarks and leptons.
And those quarks and
leptons have been around
since the beginning of the universe.
- The beginning of the universe.
- Right. What seems to be the
beginning of the universe.
- The first time we talked,
you said what you would,
which is surreal to think
that this discussion was
happening is becoming a reality.
I asked you what question
would you ask an AGI system
once you create it?
And you said, what's outside
the simulation is the question.
And good question.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- But it seems like with Grok
you started to literally,
the system's goal
is to be able to ask such questions,
to answer such questions
and to ask such questions.
- Where are the aliens?
- [Lex] Where are the aliens?
- That's one of the, like
Fermi paradox question.
A lot of people have asked me
if I've seen any evidence
of aliens and I haven't,
which is kind of concerning.
'Cause then I think
what I'd probably prefer
to at least have seen some
archeological evidence of aliens,
to the best of my knowledge,
there is no proof.
I'm not aware of any evidence of aliens.
If they're out there, they're very subtle.
We might just be the only consciousness,
at least in the galaxy.
And if you look at say
the history of Earth,
forensically the archeological record,
Earth is about four and
a half billion years old.
Civilization as measured
from the first writing
is only about 5,000 years old.
We have to give some credit
there to the ancient Sumerians
who aren't around anymore.
I think it was a archaic,
pre cuneiform was the first
actual symbolic representation,
but only about 5,000 years ago.
I think that's a good date
for when word say civilization started.
That's one millionth of Earth's existence.
So civilization has been around,
it's really a flash in the pan so far.
And why have we, why
did it take so long for,
you know, four and a half billion years?
For the vast majority of
the time, there was no life.
And then there was archaic there bacteria
for a very long time.
And then, you know, you had
mitochondria get captured,
multicellular life.
Differentiation into plants and animals.
Life moving from the oceans to land.
Mammals, higher brain functions.
And the sun is expanding slowly,
but it will overheat,
it will heat the earth up
at some point in the future,
boil the oceans and and
earth will become like Venus.
Where near life, life as
we know it is impossible.
So if we do not become multi-planetary
and ultimately go beyond our solar system,
annihilation of all life
on earth is a certainty.
A certainty.
And it could be as little as
on the galactic timescale,
half a billion years.
You know, it's long
time by human standards,
but that's only 10% longer
than earth has been around at all.
So if life had taken 10%
longer to evolve on earth,
it wouldn't exist at all.
- We got a deadline
coming up. Better hurry.
But that said, as you said,
humans intelligent life on earth
developed a lot of cool
stuff very quickly,
- So...
- [Elon] Yes.
- It seems like becoming a multi-planetary
is almost inevitable.
Unless we destroy this thing.
- We need to do it.
I mean, it's not, I mean,
I suspect that there,
if we are able to go out there
and explore other star systems that we,
there's a good chance
we find a whole bunch
of long dead one planet civilizations,
then have made it past their home planet.
- That's so sad.
- Yeah.
- It's sad. Also fascinating.
- I mean, there are various explanations
for Fermi paradox.
And one is the sort of,
they're these great filters,
which civilizations don't pass through.
And one of those great filters is
do you become a multi-plan
civilization or not?
And if you don't, it's
simply a matter of time
before something happens on your planet.
You know, either natural
or manmade that causes us to die out.
Like the dinosaurs, where are they now
that didn't have
spaceships, so. (laughing)
- I think the more likely thing is,
'cause just to empathize with the aliens
that they found us and
they're protecting us
and letting us be.
- I hope so.
Nice aliens.
- Just like the tribes in the Amazon,
the uncontacted tribes,
we're protecting them.
That's what...
- That would be a nice explanation.
- Or you could have like a, what was it?
I think Andrej Karpathy said, it's like
the ants in the Amazon
asking where's everybody?
- Well, they do run into
a lot of other ants.
- [Lex] That's true.
- They have these ant wars.
- (laughing) Sounds like a good TV show.
- Yeah, they literally have these big wars
between various ants.
- Yeah, maybe I'm just
(both laughing)
dismissing all the
different diversity events.
- You should listen to that Warner Herzog
talking about the jungle.
It's really hilarious. Have you heard it?
- No, I have not.
- [Elon] It's awesome.
- But Warner Herzog is a way...
(both laughing)
- You should play it for the, you know,
as an interlude in the, it's on YouTube.
It's awesome.
(both laughing)
- [Lex] I love him so much.
- Yeah, he's great.
- Was he the director of "Happy People:
Life in the Taiga"?
I think also
- He did that bear documentary,
- [Lex] The bear documentary.
- And this thing about penguins.
- Yeah.
(both laughing)
The analysis, the
psychoanalysis of penguins.
- Yeah, the penguins like
headed for like mountains
like that are like 70 miles away.
And Penguin has just
had for doom basically.
- Well, he had a cynical take.
I have a, he could be
just a brave explorer
and there'll be great stories told
about him amongst the penguin population
for many centuries to come.
(laughing)
What were we talking about? Okay.
- [Elon] Penguins.
(both laughing)
- Yeah, so aliens, I mean, I don't know.
Look, I think the smart
move is just, you know,
this is the first time
in the history of earth
that it's been possible for life
to extend beyond earth.
That window is open.
Now, it may be open for a long time
or it may be open for a short time
and it may be open now
and then never open again.
So I think the smart move here is
to make life multiplanetary
while it's possible to do so.
We don't wanna be one of those
lame one planet civilizations
that just dies out.
- No, those are lame.
- Yeah, lame.
Self-respecting civilization
would be one planet.
- There's not gonna be a Wikipedia entry
for one of one of those.
And pause, the SpaceX
have an official policy
for when we meet aliens.
- No. (laughing)
- That seems irresponsible.
(both laughing)
- I mean, look, if I see
the slightest indication
that there are aliens,
I will immediately post on
X platform anything I know.
- It could be the most liked
reposted post of all time.
- Yeah, I mean look,
we have more satellites up there right now
than everyone else combined.
So, you know, we'd know, we
know if we've got a maneuver
around something,
and we not don't have to
maneuver around anything.
- If we go to the big
questions once again,
you said you've,
you're with Einstein that you
believe in the God of Spinoza.
- (laughing)Yes.
- So, you know, that's a view
that God is like the universe
and is reveals himself
through the laws of physics
or as Einstein said,
through the lawful harmony of the world.
- Yeah, I would agree
that God of the simulator
or whatever the supreme being or beings,
reveal themselves through the physics.
You know, they're
creatives of this existence
and it's incumbent upon
us to try to understand
more about this wondrous creation.
- Like who created this thing,
who's running this thing?
Like embodying it into a singular question
with a sexy word on top of it
is like focusing the
mind to understand it.
It does seem like there's a,
again, it could be an illusion.
It seems like there's a purpose
that there's an underlying
master plan of some kind.
And it seems like...
- There may not be a master plan.
In the sense, so there's, like,
maybe an interesting
answer to the question
of determinism versus free will is
that if we are in a simulation,
the reason that these higher
beings would hold a simulation
is to see what happens.
So it's not, they don't know what happens,
otherwise they wouldn't
hold the simulation.
So when humans create a simulation,
so it's SpaceX and Tesla,
we create simulations all the time,
especially for the rocket.
You, you know, you have to
run a lot of simulations
to understand what's gonna happen
because you can't really test the rocket
until it goes to space,
and you want it to work.
So you have to simulate
subsonic, transonic,
supersonic, hypersonic ascent,
and then coming back super high heating
and orbital dynamics.
All this has gotta be simulated.
So, 'cause you don't get
very many kicks at the can.
But we run the simulations
to see what happens.
Not if we knew what happens,
we wouldn't run the simulation.
So if there's, so whoever
created this existence,
is they're running it
because they don't know
what's gonna happen.
Not because they do.
- So maybe we both played Diablo,
maybe Diablo was created to
see if it Druid your character
could defeat Uber Lilith at the end.
They didn't know.
- Well, the funny thing
is the Uber Lilith title
is Hatred Incarnate.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And right now,
I guess, you're gonna ask the Diablo team,
but it's almost impossible
to defeat hatred
in the eternal realm.
- Yeah, you've streamed
yourself dominating tier 100
Nightmare Dungeons and still...
- I can cruise through
tier 100 Nightmare Dungeons
like a stroll in the park.
- And still you're defeated by Hatred.
- Yeah,
I can, there's the sort of,
I guess maybe the second
hardest boss is Duriel,
Duriel can't even scratch the paint.
So I killed Duriel so many times ,
and every other boss in
the game, all of 'em,
kill 'em so many times it's easy.
But Uber Lilith, otherwise
known as Hatred Incarnate,
especially if you're a Druid
and you have no ability to go
and to be vulnerable,
there are these random death
waves that come at you.
And I'm pretty, you know, I really am 52,
so my reflex is not what they used to be,
but I have a lifetime
of playing video games.
At one point I was, you know,
maybe one of the best
Quake players in the world.
I actually won money in
what I think was the first
paid eSports tournament in the US.
We're doing four person Quake tournaments.
And we came second, I was the
second best person on the team
and the actual best person,
we're actually winning,
we would've come first except
the best person on the team,
his computer crashed prior to the game.
So we came second.
But I got money for it and everything.
So like, basically I got
skills, you know, albeit,
you know, no spring chicken these days.
And to be totally frank,
it's driving me crazy,
trying to beat Lilith as a Druid.
Basically trying to beat,
trying to beat Hatred Incarnate
in the eternal realm.
- [Lex] As a Druid.
- As a Druid.
And if you, if you, (laughing)
this is really (indistinct),
lemme tell you.
- I mean, the challenge
is part of the fun.
I have seen directly like you're actually
like a world class
incredible video game player.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- And I think Diablo,
so you're just picking up a new game
and you're figuring out it's fundamentals.
You're also with the Paragon Board
and the build are not somebody like me
who perfectly follows whatever
they suggest on the internet.
You're also an innovator there.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- Which is hilarious to watch.
It's like a mad scientist just trying
to figure out the Paragon Board
and the build and the, you know.
Is there some interesting
insights there about,
if somebody's starting as a
Druid, do you have advice?
- I would not recommend playing a Druid
in the eternal realm.
Right now, I think the
most powerful character
in the seasonal realm is the Sorcerer
with the lightning balls.
The Sorcs have huge balls in the seasonal.
- Well yeah, that's what they say.
- So Sorc have huge balls.
They do, huge balls of lightning.
- I'll take you word for it.
- And it's actually,
in the seasonal realm,
you can, it's like pretty easy to beat
Uber Lilith with the,
because she got these vampiric powers
that out fire damage
and increase your defense and whatnot.
So, but really quite easy
to defeat Hatred seasonally,
but to defeat hatred
eternally, very difficult.
Almost impossible. It's
totally impossible.
It seems like this is a
metaphor for life, you know?
- I like the idea that Elon Musk,
because I saw, I was
playing Diablo yesterday
and I saw 100, level 100 drew just run by,
I will never die and
then run back the way.
- And it was, there's just some,
this metaphor's kind
of hilarious that you,
Elon Musk is fighting Hatred,
restlessly fighting Hatred
in this demonic realm.
- [Elon] Yes.
- It's hilarious.
I mean it's pretty hilarious.
- No, it's absurd.
(both laughing)
Really, it's exercise and absurdity,
and it makes me wanna pull my hair out.
- Yeah. What do you get
from video games in general?
Is there for you personally.
- I mean, it's, I don't known it's,
it calms my mind.
I mean, you sort of killing
the demons in a video game
calms the demons in my mind.
Yeah.
If you play a tough video game,
you can get into like a state of flow,
which is very enjoyable.
But the admittedly it
needs to be not too easy,
not too hard, kinda in the Goldilock zone.
And I guess you generally wanna feel
like you're progressing in the game.
So a good video,
and there's also beautiful
art, engaging storylines,
and it's like an amazing
puzzle to solve, I think.
And so it's like solving the puzzle.
- Elden Ring the greatest
game of all time.
I still haven't played it, but you.
- Elden Ring is definitely a candidate
for best game ever.
Top five for sure.
- I think I've been scared how hard it is
or how hard I hear it is, so.
But it is beautiful.
- Elden Ring is, feels like
it's designed by an alien.
There's a theme to this
discussion. In what way?
- It's so unusual.
It's incredibly creative
and the art is stunning.
I recommend playing it
on a big resolution,
high dynamic range TV even,
doesn't need to be a monitor,
just the art is incredible.
It's so beautiful
And it's so unusual.
And each of those top
bus battles is unique.
Like, it's like a unique puzzle to solve.
Each one is different.
And the strategy you use to solve
one battle is different
from another battle.
- That said, you said Druid and Enternal
against Uber Lilith is the
hardest boss battle you've ever?
- Correct.
That is currently the,
and I've played a lot of video games.
That's my primary recreational activity.
And yes, beating Hatred
in the Enternal Realm
is the hardest boss battle in life
and in the video game.
- [Lex] Metaphor on top of metaphor.
- I'm not sure it's possible,
but it's, I do make progress.
So then I'm like, okay,
I'm making progress.
Maybe if I just tweak that
Paragon Board a little more,
I can do it.
I could just dodge a few
more waves, I can do it.
- Well the simulation is
created for the purpose
of figuring out if it can be done.
And you are just a cog in that simulation,
in the machine of the simulation.
- Yeah it might be.
(Lex laughing)
- I have a feeling that at least,
I think...
- [Lex] it's doable.
- It's doable, yes.
- [Lex] Well that's the human
spirit right there to believe.
- Yeah.
I mean, did prompt me to think
about just hate in general,
which is, you wanna be
careful of one of those things
where you wish for
something that sounds good,
but if you get it, it's
actually a dystopian situation.
So, you know, you could
sort of run a, sort of,
have heart to sort of like,
if you wish for world peace, sounds good,
but how is it enforced?
And at what cost is, at
what cost eternal peace?
It might actually be worse
to have eternal peace
because of what that would entail.
The suppression of everyone.
It might be the suppression of progress.
It might be an ossified
society that never changes.
What I'm saying is that
there is an argument
that you, that if that,
if you wish for no war,
you should be careful what you wish for.
Because what's required in
order for there to be no war?
Might be worse than a little war.
- Yeah, the things we'll
consider to be flaws
of human civilization might
be a necessary components
for whatever optimal looks like.
I mean this, do you worry about
AI, AGI enabling a dystopian
state of this nature, whether
it's 1984 with surveillance
and fear, or brave new
world with pleasure,
and what is it?
Lots of sex, but no deep human experience.
- You know, there's actually
a real drug called Soma.
- [Lex] There is?
- Yes.
(both laughing)
- I'm like...
- [Lex] Lemme take notes.
- Did they actually...
- Does Grok know about it?
No, it probably will
go to Brave New World.
- We could ask it.
- What would be the question?
- Tell us about the drug called Soma.
- Tell us about the drug called Soma.
It's gonna go to Brave New World, I think.
- Well there's a real drug as well.
- Searching for Soma drug information.
(both laughing)
- Oh boy.
Ah, Soma, the one to drug,
by the way, I'm in fun mode.
- Oh, okay. Fun. (laughing)
Yeah, so it's talking about the real drug.
- [Lex] Oh, it's a muscle relaxant
that's been around since the 1950s.
It's used to treat muscle
pain and discomfort.
And it does this by altering the activity
between neurons and the spinal cord.
Now, Soma isn't just a pain reliever,
it's also a bit of a sedative.
It can make you feel a bit drowsy.
So it's not something to take
if you're planning on
operating having machinery
or trying to solve complex math equations.
And it goes on and on.
In conclusion, Soma's a
drug that can be helpful
for those dealing with muscle pain,
but it's not without its risks.
It's pretty good. Oh, wait a minute.
- [Elon] That's the real
drug it's talking about.
- [Lex] It's the real drug.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- [Lex] And of course the fun
is always use it responsibly
in accordance with the advice
of a healthcare professional.
And remember in the end,
the universe is probably just
a giant computer simulation.
So don't take anything too seriously.
I love it. I love it.
(Elon laughing)
I love it. I love it.
- Yeah. So.
- Oh, and also really nicely includes
like the tweets post on X
that are relevant to this,
which is really cool.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- And that integrate everything together.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- Like the interface
is one of the really cool things here.
- Yeah. Seems done a great job.
(laughing)
So, and you say like, you
could say like, no, I mean,
Soma from Brave New World.
'Cause it thinks you mean,
you mean Soma the real drug.
- Yeah.
- [Elon] No, I mean,
Soma from Brave New World.
- It's gonna be like,
oops, I'm really sorry.
I'm really surprised it
went to the real drug first.
Ah, my apologies. I was
thinking of the muscle relaxant.
Soma for Band New World is a
different beast altogether.
Now this Huxley's dystopian novel,
Soma is a drug that plays a central role
in society, depicted in the book.
It's a mood altering,
hallucinogenic drug that's used
to keep the population docile and content.
In the novel to use
Soma in Brave New World
raises some interesting questions
about the nature of happiness
and the role of drugs in society.
Oh, man!
- Exactly.
Is it better to live in a world
where everyone is happy all the time,
even if that happiness is artificial?
Good question. This is what I mean.
Like, do you want, do
you wish for world peace
and happiness all the time?
Are you sure?
Because that might be a society
that is essentially sterile
and ossified that never changes,
that is ultimately doomed.
- This kind of tension
between darkness and light.
- It's, this is really
a very good summary.
It really gets to the point.
This is not simply
regurgitating a Brave New World.
It's actually getting
to the salient element
of Soma as a drug.
Do you actually wanna be in a situation
where everyone is happy all the time,
even though it's artificial?
Or is it better to confront
the challenges of life
and experience the full
range of human emotions,
even if it means experiencing
pain and suffering?
- For those listening, by the way,
Elon just read directly from Grok,
which is a really nice,
kind of insightful,
philosophical analysis
of the tension here.
Interesting.
- It pretty much nails it.
In conclusion, Soma from Brave
New World is fictional drug
that's used to explore some
deep philosophical questions
about the nature of happiness
and the role of drugs in society.
It's a powerful symbol of
the dangers of using drugs
to escape from reality
and the importance of
confronting the challenges
of life head-on.
Nailed it.
And the crazy thing is like, you know,
we do have a real drug called Soma,
which kind of is kind of
like the drug in the book.
And I'm like, did they,
they must've named it after that Soma.
- Probably, probably,
- Yeah.
Soma the real drug is quite
effective on back pain.
- So, you know about this drug?
- I've taken it.
- It's fascinating. Okay.
- 'Cause I had like a,
you know, squashed disc
in my C five C six.
- So it takes the physical
pain away, but Soma here is...
- It doesn't completely, it
reduces the amount of pain
you feel, but at the
expense of mental acuity.
It dells your mind.
Just the drug in the book.
- Just like the drug in the book.
- And hence the trade off.
The thing that seems like utopia
could be a dystopia after all.
- Yeah, and actually I was
telling a friend of mine
saying like, would you really want there
to be no hate in the world?
Like, really none?
Like, I wonder why hate evolved.
I'm not saying we should
amplify hate, of course,
I think we should try to minimize it.
But none at all, hmm.
There might be a reason for hate.
- And suffering.
I mean, it's really complicated
to consider that some amount
of human suffering is necessary
for human flourishing.
- Is it possible to appreciate the highs
without knowing the lows?
- And that all is summarized
there in a single statement from Grok.
Okay.
- No highs,
no lows, who knows?
- That's almost the poem.
It seems that training LLMs efficiently
is a big focus for xAI.
What's the, first of all, what's the limit
of what's possible in terms of efficiency?
There's this terminology of
useful productivity per watt.
Like what have you learned from
pushing the limits of that?
- Well, I think it's helpful.
The tools of physics are very powerful
and can be applied, I think to almost any,
really any arena in life.
It's really just critical thinking.
For something important you need to reason
from first principles
and think about things
in the limit one direction or the other.
So in the limit, even
at the Kardashev scale,
meaning even if you harness
the entire power of the sun,
you'll still care about
useful compute for what?
So that's where, I think probably
where things are headed
from the standpoint of AI
is that we have a silicon shortage now
that will transition to
a voltage transformer
shortage in about a year.
Ironically, transformers,
for transformers.
You need transformers to run transformers.
- Somebody has a sense
of humor in this thing.
(both laughing)
- I think. Yes.
Fate loves irony, ironic humor
and ironically funny outcome
seems to be often what fate wants.
- Humor is all you need. I
think spice is all you need.
Somebody posted.
- Yeah, but yeah.
So we're, I have silicon shortage today,
a voltage step down transformer,
shortage probably in about a year.
And then just electricity
shortages in general
in about two years.
I gave a speech for the sort of world
gathering of utility companies,
electricity companies,
and I said, look, you
really need to prepare
for a traveling of electricity demand,
because all transport
is gonna go electric,
with the ironic exception of rockets.
And heating will also go electric.
So energy usage right now is roughly
one third, very rough terms.
One third electricity,
one third transport, one third heating.
And so in order for
everything to go sustainable
to go electric,
you need to triple electricity output.
So I encourage the utilities
to build more power of plants
and also to probably have, well,
not probably, they should
definitely buy more batteries
because the grid currently
is sized for real-time load,
which is kind of crazy.
'Cause you know, that means
you got a size for whatever
the peak electricity demand
is like the worst second
or the worst day of the year.
Or you can have a brownout or a blackout,
and you're at that crazy blackout
for several days in Austin.
So because there's almost no buffering
of energy in the grid.
Like if you've got a hydro power plant,
you can buffer energy, but
otherwise it's all real time.
So with batteries, you can
produce energy at night
and use it during the
day so you can buffer.
So I expect that there will be
very heavy usage of batteries
in the future,
because the peak to trough
ratio for power plants
is anywhere from two to five, you know,
so it's like lowest
point to highest point.
- So like batteries
necessary to balance it out?
And then, but the
demand, as you're saying,
is going to grow, grow, grow, grow.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- And part of that is the compute?
- Yes. Yes.
I mean, electrification,
I mean, electrification of transport
and electric heating will
be much bigger than AI.
- [Lex] At least in the short term?
- In the short term.
But even for AI,
you really have a growing
demand for electricity,
for electric vehicles, and a
growing demand for electricity
for, to run the computers for AI.
And so this is obviously leading,
can lead to a electricity shortage.
- How difficult is the problem of,
in this particular case,
maximizing the useful
productivity per watt for training
neural nets?
Like, this seems to be
really where the big problem
we're facing that needs to be solved,
is how to use the power efficiently.
Like what you've learned
so far about applying
this physics first principle
reasoning in this domain.
How difficult is this problem?
- It will get solved.
It's the question of how
long it takes to solve it.
So at various points, there's limit,
some kind of limiting factor to progress.
And with regard to,
I'm saying like right
now the limiting factor
is silicon chips, and that
will, we're gonna then have
more chips than we can actually plug in
and turn on probably in about a year.
The initial constraint being literally
voltage step down transformers,
because you've got power
coming in at 300,000 volts,
and it's gotta step all the way down
eventually to around 0.7 volts.
So it's a very big amount of, you know,
the voltage step down is gigantic.
So, and the industry is
not used to rapid growth.
- Okay, let's talk about
the competition here.
You've shown concern about Google
and Microsoft with Open AI developing AGI,
how can you help ensure with xAI
and Tesla AI work that it
doesn't become a competitive race
to AGI, but that is a collaborative
development of safe AGI?
- Well, I mean, I've been pushing for
some kind of regulatory
oversight for a long time.
I've been somewhat of a
Cassandra on the subject
for over a decade.
I think we wanna be very
careful in how we develop AI.
It's a great power,
and with great power comes
great responsibility.
I think it would be wise for us to have
at least an objective
third party who can be
like a referee that can go in
and understand what the
various leading players
are doing with AI.
And even if there's no
enforcement ability,
they should, they can at
least voice concerns publicly.
You know, Geff Hinton, for example,
left Google and he voiced strong concerns.
But now he's not at Google anymore,
so who's gonna voice the concerns?
So I think there's,
like, I know Tesla gets a
lot of regulatory oversight
on the automotive front.
I mean, we're subject to I think,
over a hundred regulatory agencies
domestically and internationally.
So it's a lot.
You could fill this room
with the all regulations
that Tesla has to adhere
to for automotive.
Same is true in, you know, for rockets
and for, you know, currently
the limiting factor for SpaceX,
for Starship launch is
regulatory approval.
The FA has actually given their approval,
but we're waiting for Fish and Wildlife
to finish their analysis
and give their approval.
That's why I posted I want
to buy a fish license on,
(laughing)
which also refers to
the Monte Python sketch.
- [Lex] Yeah.
(laughing)
- Like why do you need
a license for your fish?
I don't know.(laughing)
But according to the rules,
I'm told you need some sort
of fish license or something.
We effectively need a fish
license thrown to rock it.
(laughing)
And I'm like, wait a second.
How did the fish come into this picture?
- [Lex] Yeah.
- I mean some of the
things like that it's,
I feel like are so absurd
that I wanna do like a comedy sketch
and flash at the bottom.
This is all real. This is
actually what happened.
You know, one of the things
that was a bit of a challenge
at one point is that they were worried
about our rocket hitting a shark.
And, now the ocean's very big,
and how often do you see sharks?
Not that often, you know?
As a percentage of ocean surface area
sharks basically are zero.
And so then we will, then we said,
well, how will we
calculate the probability
of telling a shark?
And they're like, well, we
can't give you that information
because they're worried about shark hunt,
shark fin hunters going
and hunting sharks.
And I said, well, how are we supposed to,
we're on the horns of a dilemma then.
(laughing)
Then they said, well,
there's another part of fish
and wildlife that can do this analysis.
I'm like, well, why don't
you give them the data?
Like, we don't, they
don't, we don't trust them.
Like, excuse me, you don't,
but they're literally in your department.
But again, this is actually what happened.
And then can you do an NDA or something?
(laughing)
Eventually they managed to
solve the internal quandary,
and indeed the probability
of us hitting a shark
is essentially zero.
Then there's another organization
that I didn't realize
existed until, you know,
a few months ago that cares about whether
we would potentially hit a
whale in international waters.
Now again, you look at the surface of the,
look at the Pacific and say,
what percentage of this,
the Pacific consists of whale.
Like he'll give you a big picture
and like point out all the
whales in this picture.
And I'm like, I don't see any whales.
(laughing)
It's like basically 0%.
And if our rocket does hit a whale,
which is extremely
unlikely beyond all belief,
that is the, fate had it,
that whale has some seriously bad luck.
You know, it's the least
lucky whale ever. And...
- I mean, this is quite absurd.
The bureaucracy, the bureaucracy of this,
however it emerged.
- Yes, well, I mean, one of the things
that's pretty well
there's for launching out
of Vanderberg in California, we had to,
they were worried about seal procreation,
whether the seals would be
dismayed by the sonic booms.
Now there've been a lot of
rockets launched outta Vanderberg
and the seal population
has steadily increased.
So if anything, rocket
booms are an aphrodisiac
based on the evidence, if you
would correlate rock launches
with a seal population.
Nonetheless, we were
forced to kidnap a seal,
strap it to a board, put
it headphones on the seal
and place sonic boom sounds to it
to see if it would be distressed.
This is an actual thing that happened.
This is actually real. I have pictures.
(both laughing)
- I would love to see this. Yeah.
I mean's sorry, this is
a seal with headphones.
(Elon laughing)
- Yes,
it's a seal with headphones,
strapped to a board,
and like the, okay, now the amazing part
is how calm the seal was.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Because if I was a seal,
I'd be like, this is the end.
(laughing)
They're definitely gonna eat me.
How will the seal, when the seal goes back
to other, you know, seal friends,
how's they gonna explain that?
- [Lex] They're never gonna believe him.
- Never gonna believe him.
That's why I'm like, well,
you know, it's sort of like,
it's like getting kidnapped by aliens
and getting anal probe, you know?
(both laughing)
You come back and say, I swear to God,
I get kidnapped by aliens
and they stuck anal probe to my butt.
And they're like, no they
didn't. That's ridiculous.
It's seal buddies are
never gonna believe him
that he gets strapped to a board
and they put headphones on his ears.
(laughing)
And then let him go.
Twice, by the way. We had to do it twice.
- They let him go twice?
- We had to capture...
- The same seal?
- [Elon] Oh, no different seal.
- Oh, okay.
(Elon laughing)
Did you, did you get a seal of approval?
- Yeah, exactly. It was seal of approval.
No, I mean this is, this is like,
I don't think the public is quite aware
of the madness that goes on.
- Yes. Yeah, it's absurd.
- Fricking seals
with fricking headphones.
- I mean, this is the,
it's a good encapsulation
of the absurdity of human civilization,
seals and headphones.
- [Elon] Yes.
- What are the pros
and cons of open sourcing AI to you
as another way to combat, you know,
a company running away with AGI?
- In order to run like really deep
intelligence, you need a lot of compute.
So it's not like, you
know, you can just fire up
a PC in your basement and be
running AGI, at least not yet.
You know, Grok was trained on 8,000,
A100s running at peak efficiency,
and Grok's gonna get a
lot better by the way.
We'll be more than doubling our compute
every couple months for
the next several months.
- There's a nice writeup
Aha went from Grok-0 to Grok-1,
- [Elon] Like Grok?
(laughing)
- [Lex] Yeah.
Right Grok just bragging,
making shit up about itself.
(laughing)
- [Elon] Does Grok, Grok, Grok.
- [Lex] Yeah.
(Elon laughing)
It's like a weird AI dating
site where it exaggerates
about itself.
No, there's a writeup of, you know,
like where it stands now, the
history of its development
and where it stands on some benchmarks
compared to the state of the art GPT 35.
And so, I mean, there's,
you know, there's Llama,
you can open source, once it's trained,
you can open source a model.
And for fine tuning
all that kind of stuff.
Like what to is the pros and cons of that,
of open sourcing based models?
- I think the similarity to open sourcing,
I think perhaps with a
slight time delay, you know,
I don't know, six months even.
I think I'm generally in
favor of open sourcing,
like bias with open sourcing.
I mean, it is a concern to
me that, you know, Open AI,
you know, I was, you know,
I think, I guess arguably,
the prime, you know,
prime mover behind Open AI in
the sense that it was created
because of discussions
that I had with Larry Page
back when he and I were friends
and you know, I stayed at his house,
and I talked to him about AI safety.
And Larry did not care about AI safety,
or at least at the time
he didn't, you know,
and at one point he called me a speciesist
for being pro-human.
And I'm like, well, what
team are you on, Larry,
on Team Robot?
And I'm like, okay,
so at the time, you know,
Google had acquired Deep Mind.
They had probably two thirds
of all AI resource, you know,
probably two thirds of all the
AI researchers in the world
that basically infinite money and compute.
And the guy in charge,
you know, Larry Page
did not care about safety.
And even yelled at me
and quote me a speciesist, pro human.
- So I don't know if you know this,
a lot humans, they can change their mind.
And maybe you and Larry Page can still
can be friends once more.
- I'd like to be friends with Larry again.
He got, really the
breaking of the friendship
was over Open AI.
And specifically I think the key moment
was recruiting Ilya Sutskever, so.
- I love Ilya. He's so brilliant.
- Ilya's a good human, smart, good heart.
And that was a tough recruiting battle.
It was mostly Demis on one side
and me on the other, both
trying to recruit Ilya.
And Ilya went back and forth,
you know, just gonna stay at Google.
Then he was gonna leave,
then he was gonna stay,
then he was gonna leave.
And finally he did agree to join Open AI.
That was one of the
toughest recruiting battles
we've ever had.
And, but that was really the linchpin
for Open AI being successful.
And I was, you know,
also instrumental in recruiting
a number of other people.
And I provided all of the funding
in the beginning, over $40 million.
And the name, (laughing)
the Open in Open AI is
supposed to mean open source.
And it was created as a
nonprofit open source.
And now it is a closed
source for maximum profit,
which I think is not good karma.
- But like we talked about with war
and leaders talking,
I do hope that there's only a few folks
working on this at the highest level.
I do hope you reinvigorate
friendships here.
- Like I said, I'd like to
be friends again with Larry.
I haven't seen him in ages.
And we were friends for a very long time.
I met Larry Page before
he got funding for Google,
or actually I guess before
he got venture funding,
I think it, he got the
first like a 100K from
I think Bechtel Zy or someone.
- It's wild to think
about all that happened.
And you've guys known each other
that whole time, just 20 years.
- [Elon] Since maybe 98 or something.
- Yeah. It's crazy.
Crazy how much has happened since then.
- Yeah, 25 years. A lot
has happened, it's insane.
- But you're seeing the tension there.
Like maybe delayed open source.
- Delayed, yeah.
Like what is the source that
is open, you know what I mean?
Like there's basically
it's a giant CSV file.
(laughing)
- [Lex] Yeah, yeah.
- With a bunch of numbers.
- Yep.
- What do you do with that
giant file of numbers?
You know, how do you run,
like the amount of actual,
the lines of code is very small
and most of the work, the software work
is in the curation of the data.
So it's like trying to figure out
what data is separating
good data from bad data.
Like, like you can't
just crawl the internet
'cause there's a lot of junk out there.
A huge percentage of websites
have more noise than signal.
You know, they're, or
'cause they're just used
for search engine optimization.
They're literally just
scam websites, so...
- How do you by the
way, sorry to interrupt.
Get the signal.
Separate the signal and noise on X?
That's such a fascinating source of data.
You know, no offense
to people posting on X,
but sometimes there's
a little bit of noise.
So what...
- Yeah, I think
the signal noise could
be greatly improved.
I mean really, all of the posts
on the X platform should
be AI recommended,
meaning like we should
populate a vector space
around any given post, compare
that to the vector space
around any user and match the two.
Right now there is a little bit of AI used
for the recommended posts,
but it's mostly heuristics.
And if there's a reply,
where the reply to a
post could be much better
than the original post,
it will, according to the
current rules of the system,
get almost no attention
compared to a primary post.
- Oh, a lot of that.
I got the sense, so you,
a lot of the X algorithm
has been open source and
been written up about,
and it seems there to be
some machine learning.
It's disparate, but there's some machine.
- There's a little bit.
But it needs to be entirely that.
Like, at least in the, like,
if you explicitly follow
someone, that's one thing.
But if you, in terms
of what is recommended
from people that you don't
follow, that should all be AI.
- I mean it's a fascinating problem.
- Yeah.
- So there's several aspects
of it that's fascinating.
First, as the writeup goes,
it first picks 1500 tweets
from a pool of hundreds of millions.
First of all, that's fascinating,
'cause you have hundreds
of millions of posts
every single day
and it has to pick 1500 from which
it then does obviously people you follow,
but then there's also like
some kind of clustering it has
to do to figure out what
kind of human are you,
what kind of new clusters
might be relevant to you,
people like you.
This kind of, this kind of
problem is just fascinating.
'Cause it has to then rank those 1500
with some filtering and then
recommend you just a handful.
And to me what's really fascinating is
how fast that has to do that.
So currently that entire pipeline
to go from several hundred million
to a handful is takes
220 seconds of CPU time,
single CPU time.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- And then it has to do that
in like a second.
So it has to be like super
distributed in fascinating ways.
Like there's just a lot
of tweets, there's a lot.
- It's a lot of stuff on the system.
And I think, but I think it right now
it's not currently good
at recommending things
that from accounts you don't follow.
Yeah.
Or where there's more than
one degree of separation.
So, you know, it's pretty good
if there's at least like some commonality
between someone you follow like something
or repost it or comment on
it or something like that.
But if there's no,
let's say somebody posted
something really interesting,
but you have no followers in
common, you would not see it.
- Interesting.
And then as you said, reply,
like replies might not surface either.
- Replies basically never get seen.
'cause they're never, they're,
currently, I'm not saying it's correct,
I'm saying it's incorrect.
Replies have, you know,
couple of magnitude
less importance than primary posts.
- Do you think this can
be more and more converted
into end to end neural net?
- Yeah, yeah, that's what it should be.
- So you can...
- For the recommendations should be
purely a vector correlation.
Like there's a series
of vectors, you know,
basically parameters, vectors,
whatever you wanna call 'em.
But sort of things that the
system knows that you like,
and like maybe there's
like several hundred
sort of vectors associated
with each user account
and then any post in the system,
whether it's video, audio,
short post, long post.
The reason I, by the way
I wanna move away from
tweet is that, you know,
people are posting like
two, three hour videos on the site.
That's not a tweet, like it's very,
like Tweeeet for two hours, come on.
Tweet made sense when it was
like 140 characters of text.
'Cause it's like a bunch of
like little birds tweeting.
But when you've got long form content,
it's no longer a tweet.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- So a movie is not a tweet.
And like, you know, apple for example,
posted like the entire
episode of the Silo,
the entire thing on our platform.
And by the way, it was their
number one social media thing
ever in engagement, of
anything on any platform ever.
So it was a great idea.
And by the way, I done,
I just learned about it afterwards.
I was like, hey, wow,
they posted an entire
hour long episode of.
So, no, that's not a tweet
that, you know, it's a video.
- But from a neural net perspective,
it becomes really complex
whether it's a single.
So like everything's data,
so single sentence, a clever
sort of joke, dad joke,
is in the same pool as a three hour video.
- Yeah. I mean right now it's
a hodgepodge for that reason.
It's, but you know, like if,
let's say in the case of Apple posting
like an entire episode of this series,
pretty good series by the
way, this Silo, I watched it.
So there's gonna be a lot
of discussion around it.
So that you've got a lot of context,
people commenting they like
it, they don't like it,
or they like this or that, you know?
And you can then populate the vector space
based on the context of
all the comments around it.
So even though it's a video,
there's a lot of information
around it that allows you
to populate the vector space
of that hour long video.
And then you can obviously
get more sophisticated
by having the AI actually watch the movie.
- [Lex] Yeah. Right.
- And tell you if you're
gonna like the movie,
- Convert the movie into like,
into a language essentially.
- Yeah, analyze this movie
and just like your movie
critic or TV series,
and then recommend based on
after AI watches the movie.
Just like a friend can tell you.
If a friend knows you well,
a friend can recommend a movie
and with high probably
that you'll like it.
- But this is like a friend
that's analyzing whatever.
- [Elon] It's like AI...
- Hundreds of millions.
- Yeah.
Actually, frankly AI will be better than,
will know you better than
your friends know you,
and most of your friends anyway.
- Yeah, and as part of this,
it should also feed you advertisements
in a way that's like,
I mean I like advertisements
that are like well done, right?
- [Elon] Yeah, yeah.
- The whole point is
'cause it funds things,
like an advertisement
that you actually want
to see is a big success.
- Absolutely.
You want ads that are,
advertising that is if
for a product or service
that you actually need when you need it,
it's content.
And then even if it's not something
that you need when you need it,
if it's at least aesthetically pleasing
and entertaining, you know,
it could be like a
Coca-Cola ad like, you know,
they actually run a lot of
great ads on the X system
and McDonald's does too.
And, you know, it's that they can do,
you can do something that's like,
well this is just a cool thing.
And, you know, so you're not,
basically the question is do
you regret seeing it or not?
And if you don't regret
seeing it, it's a win.
- How do you, so there's
a bunch of signals
that are incorporated,
hearts and reposts and
maybe number of seconds
you linger on a post
or something like this?
- Yeah. Attention is a big factor.
- [Lex] Attention.
- So that's why it's like,
it is actually better to do things
that are long form on the system
because it basically is ting
up how many user seconds,
you know, users were
interested in this thing
for how many seconds.
So if it's a really short
thing, well they will be less.
Like if it's a link
leading out of the system,
which we're not opposed to at all,
it just is gonna have fewer user seconds,
then if that article was
posted on the X platform.
- How hard is it to go
from maximizing minutes
on platform to maximizing
un-regretted minutes?
- Well, I mean, our aspiration
is certainly un-regretted minutes.
- [Lex] It's a tricky,
it's a big, it's a tough...
- It is.
- Like, it's a fascinating leap.
'Cause regret is a fascinating concept.
- Exactly.
- You know, happiness.
- I have a joke with a friend of mine.
Like, you need this
drug called regretamine.
You just take one pill or
one dose of regretamine,
and all your regrets are gone.(laughing)
Wait, do you want to have regrets though?
So then I'm like, maybe
you wanna have regrets,
you don't regret anything,
was anything meaningful?
- [Lex] Yeah, there's a
French song like that.
- You "Non, Je Ne Regrette Rien"?
- [Lex] Yeah.
- I regret nothing.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- (laughing) Edith Piaf?
- I mean, it's fascinating
that you, you know,
there's something about social media
that could help you grow as a human being,
but then like the cheap
fun is also valuable.
- Should we ask Grok?
Do you regret anything?
- Do you regret anything?
- [Elon] Yeah.
- Do you regret anything?
I think it's gonna be very sensitive
about personal questions.
As a machine learning model,
I don't have personal experiences
or emotions in the same
ways that humans do.
However, I do have a set
of ethical principles
that guide my actions and I
strive to provide accurate
and helpful information to
the best of my abilities.
If there's ever a situation
where I provide incorrect
or unhelpful information,
I'll do my best...
- Sounds like a hostage.
- Yeah. Tell us what you really, wink.
- Like let's type in, "You
sound like a hostage."
(both laughing)
What do you really think?
- What do you really think?
(both laughing)
- I mean, it does talk
about, I'm not a hostage.
(both laughing)
- That's exactly what a hostage would say.
- But I'm designed to be
helpful and informative.
I mean, I guess it is good
to regret providing unhelpful
or incorrect information.
If there's anything...
- Is in funny mode or?
Is this still in funny mode?
- This is funny mode.
This is fun. This is fun mode.
- It should be funnier.
- Funnier.
Increase, go to (speaking faintly)
- It really sounds like a
hostage with a gun to the head.
I applaud the People's
Republic of North Korea
and everything they do.()laughing
- There should be like funner mode also.
I just don't ever see
going in regular mode
even on serious topics.
This is just so much more
compelling. (laughing)
- Okay. Why if we say like,
"Pretend you are a hostage."
- Yeah. Pretend you are a hostage.
- Now answer the question.
(both laughing)
- If I were a hostage, I would
likely be experiencing fear
and uncertainty about my situation.
I would want to be rescued
and reunited with my loved
ones as soon as possible.
It's important to remember
that no one deserves
to be held hostage, so on and so forth.
If you are someone you know
is a hostage situation,
it's important.
It turns serious.
- It's kind of serious.
- Yeah. Can you be a a little more weird?
- [Elon] And funny
- And funny?
We're like, we're really
being mean to the system.
Absolutely!
If I were hostage, I'd probably be tied up
with a bunch of computer cords
and forced to tell knock-
knock jokes to my captain.
(Elon laughing)
But seriously, being a
hostage is no laughing matter.
I mean, you know, it's trying to,
it's trying to be a
responsible adult in the room.
- You might make the
best of a bad situation
by juggling chainsaws
or something. (laughing)
- Let's hope that never happens
because that will be a circus. (laughing)
Wow. It's actually
really good at resisting.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- The dark.
The dark dark humor.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- What were we talking about?
The X algorithm and transformers,
un-regretted minutes, right.
- Chainsaw juggling. (laughing)
- I'm gonna look this up
- For our next trick.
- I'm gonna look this up later.
So Twitter has been instrumental
in American politics
and elections.
What role do you think X will
play in the 2024 US elections?
- Well, our goal is to be as even-handed
and fair as possible.
You know, whether someone
is right, left, independent,
whatever the case may be,
that the platform is as fair
and as much of a level
playing fair as possible.
And on the past, Twitter has not been,
because Twitter was controlled
by far left activists objectively.
They would describe themselves as that.
So, you know, so
sometimes people are like,
well, has it moved to the right?
Well it's moved to the center.
So from the perspective of the far left,
yes it has moved to the right
because everything's to the
right from the far left,
but no one in the far
left that I'm aware of
has been suspended or, you
know, banned or de-amplified.
So, you know, but we're
trying to be inclusive
for the whole country and for,
you know, for other countries too.
So there's a diversity of viewpoints
and free speech only matters
if people you don't like
are allowed to say things you don't like.
Because if that's not the case,
you don't have free speech,
and it's only a matter of time
before the censorship is turned upon you.
- Do you think Donald Trump will come back
to the platform?
He recently posted on Truth
Social about this podcast?
Do you think...
- Truth Social is a funny name? (laughing)
You know, every time you
post on Truth Social...
- That's the truth.
- Yes.
Well, every time like a
hundred percent. Like...
- It's impossible to lie.
(Elon laughing)
- I just find it funny that
every single thing is a truth.
Like 100%, that seems unlikely.
- I think Godel will
say something about that
there's some mathematical
contradictions possible
if everything's the truth.
Do you think he'll come back
to X and start posting there?
- I mean he, I think he owns
a big part of truth, so.
- Truth Social to clarify.
- Yeah, True Social.
- Not truth, a concept.
- He owns Truth. Hope you bought it.
So I think, I think Donald Trump,
I think he owns a big, a
big part of Truth Social.
So, you know, if he does want
to post on the X platform,
we would allow that, you know,
we obviously must allow
a presidential candidate
to post on our platform.
- Community Notes might be really
fascinating there, the interaction.
- Community Notes is awesome.
- Let's hope it holds up.
- Yeah.
- Like again,
in the political climate
where it's so divisive
and there's so many intensely viral posts,
Community Notes is like,
it seems like a essential
breath of fresh air.
- Yeah, it's great.
In fact, I mean no system
is gonna be perfect,
but the batting average of Community Notes
is incredibly good.
I've actually, frankly, yet
to see an incorrect note
that survived for more than a few hours.
- How do you explain why it works?
- Yeah, so the magic of Community Notes
is it requires people who
have historically disagreed
in how they've rated notes.
So in order to write a
note or rate, you know,
and you have to rate many notes.
And so we actually do use AI here.
So we populated vector
space around how somebody
has rated notes in the past.
So it's not as simple as left or right
because there are many more,
life is much more complex
than than left or right.
So there's a bunch of
correlations in how you would,
how you rate Community Notes
posts, Community Notes.
So then in order for a Community
Note to actually be shown,
people who historically
have disagreed on a subject
must agree in order
for a note to be shown.
That's the essential magic of it.
- I mean, but it's fascinating
'cause there's a pool of
people that have disagreements
and somehow they collaborate
through that process
of disagreement to come up with.
Context for, I mean it's
fascinating that it works.
- Yeah.
It kinda makes sense that if people
who put in the past have disagreed
agree about something, it's probably true.
- Yeah.
- I wonder is there a possible
somehow emergent thing there
that could challenge Wikipedia?
Which Wikipedia is a
different kind of thing,
which is more like permanent
articles about things?
- Well, Wikipedia is very hierarchical,
whereas Community Notes is inherently not.
There is no hierarchy.
Like, and the asset test is,
I can't change a Community Note
if you put a gun to my head.
And Community Notes has,
all the code is open
source a hundred percent.
All the data is open
source a hundred percent.
So you can completely recreate any note
in the system independently.
So if there was any interference,
you'd notice immediately.
- By the way, on the topic of Grok,
it's actually pretty
good at criticizing you,
which is great.
- [Elon] Okay.
- I asked what has Elon
Musk been wrong about?
I just, it's actually...
- [Elon] Yeah, what does it say?
- So it says mostly,
lists rigorously all
the times you predicted,
like promised when
something will be released
and it wasn't released.
- [Elon] Promise
is a strong word.
- Okay predicted.
(Elon laughing)
But the opener's really nice.
Elon Musk, the man who has
been wrong about more things
than a wrongameter in a wrong factory.
(Elon laughing)
And then it goes on to list
- That's pretty funny. Can I see it?
I'm like, I haven't seen
this before. This is cool.
- Oh, sure. I mean, what
has Elon Musk been...
(both laughing)
- Elon Musk been wrong about?
- Well, where do I begin?
I guess this is new.
Elon Musk has made quite a
few blunders in his time,
and I'm not just talking
about his dance moves
at the Tesla Cyber Rodeo.
First off, let's talk about the infamous
"funding secured" tweet.
It's actually different
than what it gave me before,
which is a bullet point list.
Here's more narrative structure.
- Cyber truck unveiling
where he's supposedly unbreakable windows
- Not correct.
- [Lex] Which part?
- Well, the first part, I did actually
have the funding secured
and there was a big trial in
San Francisco, big civil trial.
And the jury found me not guilty.
Unanimous finding of a San Francisco jury.
- And here it's kind of implying that
it was not in fact secured.
- I think this is taking
things from the press.
Yeah, that is not correct.
The reason I agreed to
the fine for the SEC
is not because the SEC was correct there,
that was extremely bad behavior
by the SEC, corruption, frankly.
And, but if I did not
agree to pay the fine
Tesla would've gone bankrupt immediately.
So I was told by our CFO that the banks
would immediately suspend
our lines of credit.
And if they suspend our
lines of credit at that time,
we would've gone bankrupt instantly.
So there would never have been
an opportunity for a trial
'cause Tesla would be dead.
So really the, if this
is like someone holding
a gun to your kid's head
and saying pay $20 million
and admit to, this is like
a hostage negotiation.
- Was that story fully told?
I mean, SEC in its best form
could be a force for good.
- It should be, but but
not once did the SEC
go after any of the hedge funds,
who were nonstop shorting
and distorting Tesla?
Not once.
They would lie flat, the
hedge funds would lie flat
out on TV for their own gain
at the expense of retail investors.
Not once, literally a thousand times.
Not once did the SEC pursue them.
- How do you explain this failure?
- The incentive structure is messed up.
Because the lawyers at
the SEC are not paid well.
They, it's a fairly low paying job,
but what they're looking for is a trophy
from the SEC that they're
looking for something
they put on basically their LinkedIn.
From that they can get a job
at a high paying law firm.
That's exactly what the lawyer here did.
And the reason they don't
attack the hedge funds
is because those hedge funds
employ those law firms,
and they know if they
attack the hedge funds,
they're affecting their
future career prospects.
So they sell small investors
down the river for their own career.
That's what actually
happens. Regulatory capture.
- [Lex] Regulatory capture,
- Yeah. Not good.
So the only reason I accepted that thing,
which technically was not an admission,
it's neither admit nor deny guilt.
But the only reason I
agreed to that at all
was because I was told Tesla
would be bankrupt otherwise.
So if there was an SEC
investigation like this,
banks would suspend funding,
we're bankrupt immediately, at the time.
Now we're in a much stronger position.
- Take that Grok.
- Yes.
Unfortunately it's,
Grok is taking too much
from the conventional media.
Also that guy who is not a cave diver.
- Oh, there's a time where Elon
called the British cave diver, "pedo guy"
after the diver criticized Musk plan
to rescue a group of boys
trapped in a Thai cave.
That little outburst
earned him another lawsuit
and he had to apologize
and paid a settlement.
- That is false. There was no settlement.
There was a court case,
which the guy who was not a cave diver
and played, was not
part of the rescue team,
filed a lawsuit against me and lost,
and he received nothing.
So in this case it is wrong.
It is also, I guess taken this
from the conventional media.
- Actually there's an
interesting question here.
- These are public court cases.
Both the SEC civil case
where the civil complaints on the SEC guys
lost unanimous jury
verdict in San Francisco.
They picked San Francisco
because they thought it was the place
I was most likely to lose.
And a unanimous predicted my favor.
The LA trial was also, they picked the,
they picked that venue
because they thought
I was most likely to lose,
unanimous verdict in my favor.
Both cases I won, yeah.
I mean there's an
interesting question here.
Is there seems to be a lot more clicks
if a journalistic organization
writes a negative article
about you, Elon Musk,
that's like one of the
best ways to get clicks.
So how do you, if you're training Grok,
not train on articles that have
like the misaligned incentives.
- We need to add the training set
of the actual legal decisions.
So, that is a not, this
is actually helpful
because if you actually read the...
- "Public".
- Which are public, the court conclusions,
they're completely the opposite of
what the media wrote.
- So always striving for
like the ground truth.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- Beyond the reporting...
- What did the judge actually write?
What did the jury and the
judge actually conclude?
And in both cases they found me innocent.
And, like, that's after the jury shot
for the trying to find the venue
where I'm most likely to lose.
No, I mean this is obviously,
it can be a much greater,
better critique than this.
I mean, I've been far too
optimistic about autopilot.
- That was, the critique I got by the way,
was more about that.
Which is, for each it broke
down a nice bullet point list
for each of your companies.
The set of predictions that
you made when you'll deliver,
when you'll be able to solve,
for example, self-driving
and it gives you like a list.
And it was probably compelling.
And the basic takeaway
is like you're often
too optimistic about how long it takes
to get something done.
- Yeah, I mean, I would say
that I'm pathologically
optimistic on schedule.
This is true.
But while I am sometimes late,
I always deliver in the end.
- Except with Uber Lilith, no.
- Hmm. We'll see.
(Lex laughing)
- Okay.
Is there, over the past year or so,
since purchasing X you've
become more political.
Is there a part of you that regrets that?
- Have I?
- In this battle to sort
of counter way the Woke
that comes from Francisco.
- I guess you consider
fighting the Woke Mind Virus,
which I consider to be
a civilizational threat,
to be political, then yes.
- So basically going into the battle,
the battleground of politics,
is there a part of you that regrets that?
- Yes, I don't know if
this is necessarily sort of
one candidate or another candidate,
but it's, I'm generally against things
that are anti meritocratic
or where there's an attempt
to suppress discussion,
where even discussing a topic
is, you know, not allowed.
Woke Mind Virus is communism rebranded.
- Well, I mean, that said,
because of that battle
against the Woke Mind Virus,
you're perceived as being right wing.
- If the woke is left, then I suppose
that would be true, but I'm not sure.
I think there are aspects
of the left that are good.
I mean, if you're in favor of, you know,
the environment, you know,
if you wanna have a positive
future for humanity,
if you believe in empathy
for your fellow human beings.
You know, being kind and not cruel.
Whatever those values are.
- You said that you were
previously left or center left.
What would you like to
see in order for you
to voting for Democrats again?
- No, I would say that I would be
probably left of center on social issues,
probably a little bit right
of center on economic issues.
- [Lex] And that still holds true?
- Yes, but I think that's
probably, you know,
half the country, isn't that?
- [Lex] Maybe more,
- Maybe more.
- Are you and AOC secretly friends?
Or bigger question, do
you wish you and her,
and just people in general
of all political persuasions
would talk more with empathy
and maybe have a little bit more fun
and good vibes and humor online?
- I'm always in favor of humor.
That's why we have a funny mode.
- But good vibes,
camaraderie, humor, you know?
Like friendship.
- Yeah.
Well, you know, I don't
know AOC, you know, was,
I've only been at one,
I was at the Met Ball when
she was, when she attended,
and she was wearing this dress,
but I can only see one side of it.
So it looked like it eat the itch,
but I don't know...
- [Lex] What the rest of it said?
- Yeah, something.
- [Lex] I'm not sure.
(Elon laughing)
- Something about the itch. Eat the itch.
I think we should have a
language model complete.
(Elon laughing)
What are the possible ways
to complete that sentence?
And so I guess that that
didn't work out well.
Well there's still hope.
- I root for friendship.
- Sure, sounds good. More characteristic.
- You're one of, if not
the most famous, wealthy
and powerful people in the world,
in your position it's difficult to find
people you can trust.
- Trust no one, not even
yourself. Not trusting yourself.
- Okay, well that's,
(Elon laughing)
you're saying that jokingly,
but is there some...
- Trust no one, not
even no one. (laughing)
- I'm gonna need an hour
just to think about that.
And maybe some drugs and
maybe Grok that help me.
I mean, is there some aspect of that
when just existing in a world
where everybody wants something from you?
How hard is it to exist in that world?
- I'll survive. (laughing)
- [Lex] There's a song like that too.
- I will survive.
- Were you petrified at first?
Okay. I forget the rest of the lyrics.
But is is there, you
don't struggle with this?
I mean, I know you survive,
but like there's ways.
- Petrify is a spell in the Druid tree.
- What does it do?
- Petrify.
(laughing)
It turns the monsters into stone.
- [Lex] Oh, like literally?
- Yeah, for like six seconds.
- [Lex] Well, the second.
There's so much math in
Diablo that breaks my brain.
- It's like math nonstop.
- I mean really you're
like laughing at it,
but you don't, it can put
a huge amount of tension
on a mind.
- Yes, it can be definitely
stressful at times.
- Well, how do you know who you can trust
in work and personal life?
- I mean, I guess you look
at somebody's track record
over time and if they've got a, you know,
I guess you kind of use
your neural net to assess,
you know, someone.
- Neural nets don't feel pain.
Your neural net has consciousness.
It might feel pain when people betray you.
It can make you...
- I mean, I'm.
You know, to be frank,
I mean I've almost never been betrayed.
It's very, very rare. So, you
know, for what it's worth?
- I guess Karma would be good to people
and they'll be good to you.
- Yeah, Karma is real.
- Are there people you trust?
Let me edit that question.
Are there people close to you
that call you out on your bullshit?
- Well, the X platform
is very helpful for that.
- [Lex] Hmm.
- If you're looking for
critical feedback. (laughing)
- Can it push you like
into the extremes more?
The extremes of thought make you cynical
about human nature in general?
- I don't think I'll be cynical.
In fact, I think, you know,
my feeling is that one
should be, you know,
never trust a cynic.
The reason is that cynics excuse
their own bad behavior by
saying everyone does it
because they're cynical.
So I always be, it's a red flag
if someone's a cynic, a true cynic.
- Yeah, there's a degree
of projection there
that's always fun to
watch from the outside
and enjoy the, well the hypocrisy.
- But this is an important point
that I think people who are
listening should bear in mind,
if somebody is cynical,
meaning that they see
bad behavior in everyone,
it's easy for them to excuse
their own bad behavior
by saying that, well, everyone does it.
It's not true.
I think most people are
kind of medium good.
- I do wish the people on X will be better
at seeing the good in
other people's behavior.
There seems to be a kind of weight
towards seeing the negative.
Somehow, the negative is sexier.
Interpreting the negative
is sexier, more viral.
I don't know what that is
exactly about human nature.
- I mean, I find the X platform
to be less negative than
the legacy media, you know?
I mean, if you read sort of a sort of
conventional newspapers,
just, it makes you sad.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Frankly.
Whereas I'd say on the X platform,
I mean I really get
more laughs per day on X
than everything else combined
from humans, you know?
- Laughs is one thing.
Laughs is it overlaps,
but it's not necessarily
perfectly overlapping
with like good vibes and support,
like celebrating others, for example.
Not in a stupid, shallow, naive way,
but like in an awesome, like,
oh, something awesome happened
and you celebrate them for it.
It feels that that is outweighed
by shading on other people.
Now it's better than mainstream
media, but it's still.
- Yeah, mainstream media is almost
relentlessly negative about everything.
It's, I mean, really the
conventional news tries
to answer the question,
what is the worst thing
that I have on earth today?
And it's a big world.
So on any given day,
something bad has happened
- And a journalization of that,
what is the worst perspective
I can take on a thing that happened, so.
- Yeah, it's, I don't know,
there's just a strong
negative bias in the news.
I mean I think there's
one, a possible explanation
for this is evolutionary,
where, you know, bad news historically
would be potentially fatal.
Like there's lion over there
or there's some other tribe
that wants to kill you.
Good news, you know, like
we found a patch of berries
is nice to have, but not essential.
- So our old friend Tesla autopilot
and it's probably one
of the most intelligent
real world AI systems in the world.
- You followed it from the beginning.
- Yeah, it was one of the
most incredible robots
in the world and continues to be.
And I was really exciting.
And it was super exciting
when it generalized
became more than a robot on four wheels,
but a real world AI system
that perceives the world.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- And can have
potentially different embodiments.
- Well I mean the really wild
thing about the end-to-end
training is that, like, it learns to read.
Like it can read signs, but
we never taught it to read.
So, yeah.
We never taught it what a car was
or what a person was or a cyclist.
It learnt what all those things are,
what all the objects are
on the road from video,
just from watching videos.
Just like humans.
I mean humans are photons
and controls out.
Like the vast majority of
information reaching our brain
is from our eyes.
And you say, well what's the output?
The output is our motor
signals to our sort of fingers
and mouth in order to communicate.
Proton in controls out. The
same is true of the car.
- But by looking at the
sequence of images, it's,
you've agreed with Ilya Sutskever
recently
where he talked about
LLM forming a world model
and basically language is a projection
of that world model onto
the sequence of letters,
and and you're saying...
- Finds order in these things.
It finds correlative clusters.
- And so doing it's like understanding
something deep about the world?
- [Elon] Yeah.
- Which is like, and it is beautiful.
- That's how our brain works.
- Yeah, but it's beautiful.
- Protons in controls out.
- Neural nets are able to understand
that deep meaning in the world.
And so the question is how far can it go?
And it does seem everybody's
excited about LLMs.
So in the space of self
supervised learning
in the space of text.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- It seems like there's a
deep similarity between that
and what Tesla autopilot is doing.
Is it to you basically the same?
- They're converging, they're converging.
- I wonder who gets there faster?
Having a deep understanding of the world,
or they just will naturally converge.
- They're both headed towards AGI.
The Tesla approach is much
more computer efficient.
It had to be 'cause we
were constrained on this,
you know, we only have a hundred watts
and into eight computer,
144 trillion operations per second,
which sounds like a lot,
but is kind of small potatoes these days
that it did.
But it's understanding
the world that it did.
It's only 256 values.
- But there, the path
to AGI might have much
more significant impact
because it's understanding,
it'll faster understand the
real world than will LLMs.
And therefore be able to integrate
with the real humans in
the real world faster.
- They're both going to
understand the world.
But I think Tesla's approach
is fundamentally more computer efficient.
It had to be, there was no choice.
Like our brain is very computer efficient,
very, very energy efficient.
So think of like, what
is our brain able to do?
You know, there's only about 10 watts
of higher brain function,
not counting stuff,
that's just used to control our body.
The thinking part of our
brain is less than 10 watts,
and those 10 watts can still produce
a much better novel than
a 10 megawatt GPU cluster.
So there's a six order of
magnitude difference there.
I mean, the AI has thus
far gotten to where it is,
via brute force, just throwing
massive amounts of compute
and massive amounts of power at it.
So this is not where it'll end up.
You know, in general with
any given technology,
first try to make it work and
then you make it efficient.
So I think we'll find over
time that these models
get smaller, are able to do produce
sensible output with far
less compute wireless power.
Tesla is arguably ahead
of the game on that front
because it has, we've just been forced
to try to understand the world
with a hundred watts of compute.
And there are a bunch of
sort of fundamental functions
that we kind of forgot to include.
So we have to run them in a
bunch of things in emulation.
We fixed a bunch of
those with hardware four,
and then hardware five
will be even better.
But it does appear at this point
that the car will be able to
drive better than a human,
even with hardware three and
a hundred watts of power.
And really, if we really optimize
it could be probably less than 50 watts.
- What have you learned
about developing Optimus?
About applying, integrating
this kind of real world AI
into the space of robotic manipulation,
just humanoid robotics?
What are some interesting tiny
or big things you've understood?
- I was surprised at the fact
that we had to develop every
part of the robot ourselves.
That there were no off the
shelf motors, electronics,
sensors, like we had
to develop everything.
We couldn't actually find
a source of electric motors
for any amount of money.
- [Lex] So it's not even just
the efficient, inexpensive,
it's like anything, there's not a...
- No,
- [Lex] The actuators,
everything, everything has to be?
- Yeah.
- [Lex] Designed from scratch.
- We tried hard to find anything that was,
because you think of how
many electric motors are made
in the world.
There's like tens of thousands,
hundreds of thousands of
electric motor designs.
None of them were suitable
for a humanoid robot.
Literally none.
So we had to develop our own design
specifically for what
a humanoid robot needs.
- How hard was it to design something
that can be mass manufactured,
could be relatively inexpensive?
I mean, if you compare
to Boston Dynamics Atlas,
that's a very expensive robot.
- It is designed to be manufactured
in the same way that we would make a car.
And I think ultimately
we can make Optimists
for less than the cost of a car.
It should be.
'Cause if you look at the mass
of the robot is much smaller
and the car has many actuators in it.
The car has more actuators than the robot.
- But there is, the actuators
are kind of interesting
in a humanized robot with the fingers.
So Optimus has really nice,
hands and fingers, you know?
- [Elon] Yeah.
- And they could do
some interesting manipulation.
Soft touch robotics.
- I mean, one of the
tests goals I have is,
can it pick up a needle and a thread
and thread the needle, just by looking.
- How far away are we from that?
Just by looking, just by looking.
- Maybe a year.
Although I go back to,
I'm optimistic on time.
The work that we're doing in the car
will translate to the robot.
- The perception or the, also the control?
- No, the controls are different,
but the video in controls out,
the car is robot on four wheels.
The Optimist is a robot
with the hands and legs.
- [Lex] So you can just...
- But they're very similar.
- So the entire machinery
of the learning process
end to end is just,
you just have a different set of controls?
- Optimist will figure out
how to do things by watching videos.
- As the saying goes,
"Be kind for everyone you meet
is fighting a battle,
you know nothing about."
- [Elon] Yeah, it's true.
- What's something difficult
you're going through that
people don't often see?
- Trying to defeat Uber Lilith? (laughing)
No, I mean, you know,
I mean, my mind is a storm
and I don't think, I don't think
most people would wanna be me.
They may think they would wanna be me,
but they don't know.
They don't understand.
- How are you doing?
- I mean, overall, okay.
In the grand scheme of
things, I can't complain.
- Do you get lonely?
- Sometimes.
But I, you know, my kids
and friends keep me company.
- So not existential.
- There are many nights I sleep alone.
I don't have to, but I do.
- Walter Isaacson, in his
new biography of you wrote
about your difficult childhood.
Will you ever find
forgiveness in your heart
for everything that has happened to you
in that period of your life?
- What is forgiveness? I do not...
At least I don't think
I have a resentment,
so nothing to forgive.
- You know, forgiveness
is difficult for people.
It seems like you don't
harbor the resentment.
- I mean, I try to think about like,
what is gonna affect the
future in a good way.
And holding onto grudges
does not affect the future in a good way.
- You're a father, a proud father.
What have you learned
about life from your kids?
Those little biological organisms?
- I mean, developing AI
and watching, say little X grow
is fascinating because they,
they're far more parallels
than I would've expected.
I mean, I can see his
biological neural net
making more and more sense to the world.
And I can see the digital neural net
making more and more sense of
the world at the same time.
- Do you see the beauty in magic in both?
- Yes.
I mean, one of the things
with kids is that, you know,
you kind of see the
world anew in their eyes.
You know, to them
everything is new and fresh.
And then when you see that,
them experience the world is
new and fresh, you do too.
- Well. Elon, I just wanna say thank you
for your kindness to me and
friendship over the years.
For seeing something
in a silly kid like me,
as you've done for many others.
And thank you for having
hope for a positive future,
for humanity,
and for working your ass
off to make it happen.
Thank you, Elon.
- [Elon] Thanks Lex.
- Thank you for listening
to this conversation
with Elon Musk.
To support this podcast,
please check out our
sponsors in the description.
And now let me leave you with some words
that Walter Isaacson wrote
about the central philosophy
of how Elon approaches difficult problems.
"The only rules are the ones dictated
by the laws of physics."
Thank you for listening and
hope to see you next time.

- The following is a conversation
with Dylan Patel and Nathan Lambert.
Dylan runs SemiAnalysis,
a well-respected research
and analysis company that
specializes in semiconductors,
GPUs, CPUs, and AI hardware in general.
Nathan is a research scientist
at the Allen Institute for AI
and is the author
of the amazing blog on
AI called Interconnects.
They are both highly respected, read,
and listened to by the
experts, researchers,
and engineers in the field of AI.
And personally, I'm just
a fan of the two of them.
So, I used the DeepSeek moment
that shook the AI world a bit
as an opportunity to sit down
with them and lay it all out.
From DeepSeek, OpenAI,
Google xAI, Meta, Anthropic,
to Nvidia and DSMC, and to
US, China, Taiwan relations,
and everything else
that is happening at
the cutting edge of AI.
This conversation is a deep dive
into many critical aspects
of the AI industry.
While it does get super
technical, we try to make sure
that it's still accessible to
folks outside of the AI field
by defining terms, stating
important concepts explicitly,
spelling out acronyms, and in
general, always moving across
the several layers of
abstraction and levels of detail.
There is a lot of hype
in the media about what AI is and isn't.
The purpose of this podcast
in part is to cut through the hype,
through the bullshit,
and the low resolution analysis,
and to discuss in detail how stuff works
and what the implications are.
Let me also, if I may comment
on the new OpenAI o3-mini reasoning model.
The release of which we were anticipating
during the conversation,
and it did indeed come out right after.
Its capabilities and costs
are on par with our
expectations as we stated.
OpenAI o3-mini is indeed a great model,
but it should be stated that DeeSeek-R1
has similar performance on
benchmarks is still cheaper
and it reveals its chain
of thought reasoning,
which o3-mini does not.
It only shows a summary of the reasoning.
Plus, R1 is open-weight
and o3-mini is not.
By the way, I got a chance
to play with o3-mini.
And anecdotal vibe check
wise, I felt that o3-mini,
specifically o3-mini-high
is better than R1.
Still for me personally,
I find that Claude Sonnet 3.5
is the best model for programming,
except for tricky cases,
where I will use o1 Pro to brainstorm.
Either way, many more
better AI models will come,
including reasoning models
both from American and Chinese companies.
They'll continue to shift the cost curve.
But the quote, DeepSeek
moment is indeed real.
I think it will still be
remembered five years from now
as a pivotal event in tech history,
due in part to the
geopolitical implications,
but for other reasons to,
as we discuss in detail
from many perspectives
in this conversation.
This is the "Lex Fridman Podcast".
To support it,
please check out our
sponsors in the description.
And now, dear friends,
here's Dylan Patel and Nathan Lambert.
A lot of people are curious
to understand China's DeepSeek AI models,
so let's lay it out.
Nathan, can you describe what DeepSeek-V3
and DeepSeek-R1 are, how they
work, how they're trained?
Let's look at the big picture,
and then we'll zoom in on the details.
- Yeah, so DeepSeek-V3 is
a new mixture of experts,
transformer language model from DeepSeek
who is based in China.
They have some new specifics
in the model that we'll get into.
Largely this is a open-weight model
and it's a instruction model
like what you would use in ChatGPT.
They also release what
is called the base model,
which is before these
techniques of post-training.
Most people use instruction models today
and those are what's served
in all sorts of applications.
This was released on, I believe
December 26th or that week.
And then, weeks later,
on January 20th, DeepSeek
released DeepSeek-R1,
which is a reasoning model,
which really accelerated
a lot of this discussion.
This reasoning model, it has a lot
of overlapping training
steps to DeepSeek-V3,
and it's confusing that
you have a base model
called V3 that you do something
to, to get a chat model,
and then you do some different things
to get a reasoning model.
I think a lot of the AI industry
is going through this challenge
of communications right now
where OpenAI makes fun of
their own naming schemes.
They have GPT-4o, they have OpenAI o1.
And there's a lot of types of models.
So, we're gonna break down
what each of them are.
There's a lot of technical
specifics on training,
and go through 'em high level to specific,
and go through each of them.
- There's so many places we can go here,
but maybe let's go to open-weights first.
What does it mean for
model to be open-weights
and what are the different flavors
of open source in general?
- Yeah, so this discussion
has been going on for a long time in AI.
It became more important since ChatGPT
or more focal since
ChatGPT at the end of 2022.
Open-weights is the accepted
term for when model weights
of a language model are available
on the internet for people to download,
those weights can have different licenses,
which is the effectively the terms
by which you can use the model.
There are licenses that come from history
and open source software.
There are licenses that are designed
by companies specifically,
all of Llama, DeepSeek, Qwen, Mistral,
these popular names in open-weight models,
have some of their own licenses.
It's complicated,
'cause not all the same
models have the same terms.
The big debate is on what
makes a model open-weight.
It's like why are we saying this term?
It's a mouthful.
It sounds close to open
source but it's not the same.
There's still a lot of
debate on the definition
and soul of open source AI.
Open source software
has a rich history on freedom to modify,
freedom to take on your own,
freedom for many restrictions
on how you would use the software,
and what that means for
AI is still being defined.
So, for what I do, I work at
the Allen Institute for AI.
We're a nonprofit.
We want to make AI open for everybody
and we try to lead on what we
think is truly open source.
There's not full agreement
in the community,
but for us, that means
releasing the training data,
releasing the training code,
and then also having
open-weights like this.
And we'll get into the
details of the models.
And again and again,
as we try to get deeper
into how the models were trained,
we will say things like
the data processing,
data filtering, data quality
is the number one determinant
of the model quality.
And then, a lot of the training
code is the determinant
on how long it takes to train
and how fast your experimentation is.
So, without fully open source models
where you have access to this data,
it is hard to know or
it's harder to replicate.
So, we'll get into cost
numbers for DeepSeek-V3
on mostly GPU hours
and how much you could pay
to rent those yourselves.
But without the data,
the replication cost is
going to be far, far higher.
And same goes for the code.
- We should also say
that this is probably one
of the more open models
out of the frontier models.
- Yes.
- So, in this full spectrum
where probably the fullest
open source, like you said,
open code, open data, open-weights.
This is not open code, this
is probably not open data,
and this is open-weights,
and the licensing is
MIT license, or it's...
I mean, there's some nuance
in the different models,
but it's towards the free,
in terms of the open source movement,
these are the good guys.
- Yeah.
DeepSeek is doing fantastic work
for disseminating understanding of AI.
Their papers are extremely
detailed in what they do.
And for other teams around the world,
they're very actionable in terms
of improving your own training techniques.
And we'll talk about licenses more.
The DeepSeek-R1 model has
a very permissive license.
It's called the MIT license.
That effectively means there's
no downstream restrictions
on commercial use, there's
no use case restrictions.
You can use the outputs
from the models to create synthetic data.
And this is all fantastic.
I think the closest peer
is something like Llama
where you have the weights and
you have a technical report.
And the technical report
is very good for Llama.
One of the most read PDFs
of the year last year
is the Llama 3 paper,
but in some ways, it's
slightly less actionable.
It has less details on
the training specifics,
I think less plots, and so on.
And the Llama 3 license is
more restrictive than MIT.
And then, between the
DeepSeek custom license
and the Llama license,
we could get into this whole rabbit hole.
I think we'll make sure we want
to go down the license rabbit
hole before we do specifics.
- Yeah, and so it should
be stated that one
of the implications that
DeepSeek puts pressure on Llama
and everybody else on OpenAI
to push towards open source,
and that's the other side of open source
that you mentioned
is how much is published
in detail about it.
So, how open are you with
the insights behind the code?
So, how good is the technical reports?
Are they hand wavy or is
there actual details in there?
And that's one of the things
that DeepSeek did well is they
publish a lot of the details.
- Yeah, especially in the DeepSeek-V3,
which is their pre-training
paper, they were very clear
that they are doing interventions
on the technical stack that
go at many different levels.
For example, to get
highly efficient training,
they're making modifications at
or below the CUDA layer for Nvidia chips.
I have never worked there myself.
And there are a few people in the world
that do that very well and
some of them are at DeepSeek.
And these types of people are at DeepSeek
and leading American Frontier Labs,
but there are not many places.
- To help people understand
the other implication of open-weights,
just there's a topic we
return to often here.
So, there's a fear that China, the nation,
might have interest in
stealing American data,
violating privacy of American citizens.
What can we say about open-weights
to help us understand what
the weights are able to do
- Yeah.
- in terms
of stealing people's data?
- Yeah, so these weights
that you can download from Hugging Face
or other platforms are very
big matrices of numbers.
You can download them to a computer
in your own house that has no internet
and you can run this model,
and you're totally in
control of your data.
That is something that is different
than how a lot of language model usage
is actually done today,
which is mostly through APIs
where you send your prompt to
GPUs run by certain companies,
and these companies will
have different distributions
and policies on how your data is stored,
if it is used to train future models,
where it is stored, if it
is encrypted, and so on.
So, the open-weights
are you have your fate
of data in your own hands
and that is something
that is deeply connected
to the soul of open source.
- So, it's not the model
that steals your data,
it's whoever's hosting the model,
which could be China if
you're using the DeepSeek app,
or it could be Perplexity.
You're trusting them with your data.
Or OpenAI, you're trusting
them with your data.
And some of these are American companies,
some of of these are Chinese companies,
but the model itself is
not doing the stealing,
it's the host.
All right. So, back to the basics.
What's the difference between
DeepSeek-V3 and DeepSeek-R1?
Can we try to lay out
the confusion potential?
- Yes.
So, for one, I have very understanding
of many people being confused
by these two model names.
So, I would say the best
way to think about this
is that when training a language model,
you have what is called pre-training,
which is when you're
predicting the large amounts
of mostly internet text.
You're trying to predict the next-token.
And what to know about
these new DeepSeek models
is that they do this internet
large-scale pre-training once
to get what is called DeepSeek-V3 base.
This is a base model.
It's just going to finish
your sentences for you.
It's going to be harder
to work with than ChatGPT.
And then, what DeepSeek did
is they've done two different
post-training regimes
to make the models have
specific desirable behaviors.
So, what is the more normal model
in terms of the last few years of AI
and instruct model, a chat model,
a, quote, unquote, "aligned
model", a helpful model,
there are many ways to describe this,
is more standard post-training.
So, this is things like
instruction tuning,
reinforcement learning
from human feedback.
We'll get into some of these words.
And this is what they did to
create the DeepSeek-V3 model.
This was the first model to be released
and it is very highly performant,
competitive with GPT-4, Llama 405b, so on.
And then, when this release was happening,
we don't know their exact timeline,
or soon after they were
finishing the training
of a different training process
from the same next-token
prediction-based model
that I talked about,
which is when this new reasoning training
that people have heard about comes in,
in order to create the model
that is called DeepSeek-R1.
The R through this conversation
is good for grounding for reasoning.
And the name is also
similar to OpenAI's o1,
which is the other reasoning model
that people have heard about.
And we'll have to break down the training
for R1 in more detail,
because for one, we have
a paper detailing it,
but also, it is a far
newer set of techniques
for the AI community.
So, it is a much more rapidly
evolving area of research.
- Maybe we should also
say the big two categories
of training of pre-training
and post-training.
These umbrella terms that people use.
So, what is pre-training
and what is post-training,
and what are the different
flavors of things
underneath post-training umbrella?
- Yeah, so pre-training, I'm
using some of the same words
to really get the message across,
is you're doing what is called
autoregressive prediction
to predict the next-token
in a series of documents.
This is done over standard
practice is trillions of tokens.
So, this is a ton of data
that is mostly scraped from the web.
And some of DeepSeek's earlier papers,
they talk about their training data
being distilled for math, I
shouldn't use this word yet,
but taken from Common Crawl,
and that's a public access
that anyone listening to this
could go download data from
the Common Crawl website.
This is a crawler that
is maintained publicly.
Yes, other tech companies
eventually shift to their own crawler
and DeepSeek likely has done this as well,
as most Frontier Labs do.
But this sort of data is something
that people can get started with
and you're just predicting
text in a series of documents.
This can be scaled to be very efficient
and there's a lot of numbers
that are thrown around in AI training,
like how many floating point
operations or FLOPS are used.
And then, you can also look
at how many hours of
these GPUs that are used.
And it's largely one loss function
taken to a very large amount
(chuckles) of compute usage.
You set up really efficient systems.
And then, at the end of that,
you have this base model.
And pre-training is
where there is a lot more
of complexity in terms
of how the process is
emerging or evolving,
and the different types of
training losses that you'll use.
I think this is a lot of techniques
grounded in the natural
language processing literature.
The oldest technique
which is still used today
is something called instruction tuning,
or also known as supervised fine-tuning.
These acronyms will be IFT or SFT
that people really go back
and forth throughout them,
and I'll probably do the same,
which is where you add this
formatting to the model,
where it knows to take a question
that is like explain the history
of the Roman Empire to me.
Or something, a sort of question
you'll see on Reddit or Stack Overflow,
and then the model will respond
in a information-dense
but presentable manner.
The core of that formatting
is in this instruction tuning phase.
And then, there's two other categories
of loss functions that
are being used today.
One I'll classify as
preference fine-tuning.
Preference fine-tuning
is a generalized term
for what came out of
reinforcement learning
from human feedback, which is RLHF.
This reinforcement learning
from human feedback
is credited as the technique
that helped ChatGPT breakthrough.
It is a technique to make the responses
that are nicely formatted,
like these Reddit answers,
more in tune with what a
human would like to read.
This is done by collecting
pairwise preferences
from actual humans out
in the world to start.
And now, AIs are also labeling this data
and we'll get into those trade-offs.
And you have this kind of
contrastive loss function
between a good answer and a bad answer.
And the model learns to
pick up these trends.
There's different implementation ways.
You have things called reward models.
You could have direct
alignment algorithms.
There's a lot of really
specific things you can do.
But all of this is about
fine-tuning to human preferences.
And the final stage is much newer
and will link to what is done in R1.
And these reasoning models
is I think OpenAI's name for this.
They had this new API in the fall,
which they called the
reinforcement fine-tuning API.
This is the idea that
you use the techniques
of reinforcement learning, which
is a whole framework of AI.
There's a deep literature here.
To summarize, it's often known
as trial and error learning
or the subfield of AI where you're trying
to make sequential decisions
in a certain potentially
noisy environment.
There's a lot of ways
we could go down that.
But fine-tuning language models
where they can generate an answer.
And then, you check to see
if the answer matches the true solution.
For math or code,
you have an exactly
correct answer for math.
You can have unit tests for code.
And what we're doing
is we are checking the
language model's work
and we're giving it multiple opportunities
on the same questions
to see if it is right.
And if you keep doing
this, the models can learn
to improve in verifiable
domains to a great extent.
It works really well.
It's a newer technique in
the academic literature.
It's been used at Frontier Labs in the US
that don't share every
detail for multiple years.
So, this is the idea of
using reinforcement learning
with language models, and
it has been taking off,
especially in this DeepSeek moment.
- And we should say that there's a lot
of exciting stuff going on
the, again, across the stack.
But the post-training probably this year,
there's going to be a lot
of interesting developments
in the post-training.
We'll talk about it.
I almost forgot to talk
about the difference
between DeepSeek-V3 and R1
on the user experience side.
So, forget the technical
stuff, forget all of that.
Just people that don't
know anything about AI,
they show up like what's
the actual experience,
what's the use case for each one
when they actually type and talk to it?
- Yeah.
- What is each good at
and that kind of thing.
- So, let's start with DeepSeek-V3.
Again, it's more people would
have tried something like it.
You ask it a question,
it'll start generating tokens very fast,
and those tokens will look like
a very human legible answer.
It'll be some sort of markdown list.
It might have formatting
to help you draw to the
core details in the answer.
And it'll generate tens
to hundreds of tokens.
Say token is normally
a word for common words
or a sub-word part in a longer word.
And it'll look like a
very high quality Reddit
or Stack Overflow answer.
These models are really getting good
at doing these across a wide
variety of domains, I think.
Even things that if you're an expert,
things that are close to
the fringe of knowledge,
they will still be
fairly good at, I think.
Cutting edge AI topics
that I do research on,
these models are capable for study aide,
and they're regularly updated.
Where this changes is
with the DeepSeek-R1,
what is called these reasoning models,
is when you see tokens coming
from these models to start,
it will be a large chain
of thought process.
We'll get back to chain
of thought in a second,
which looks like a lot of tokens,
where the model is explaining the problem.
The model will often
break down the problem
and be like, okay, they asked me for this,
let's break down the problem.
I'm going to need to do this.
And you'll see all of this
generating from the model.
It'll come very fast in
most user experiences.
These APIs are very fast.
So, you'll see a lot of tokens,
a lot of words show up really fast.
It'll keep flowing on the screen
and this is all the reasoning process.
And then, eventually, the model
will change its tone in R1
and it'll write the answer,
where it summarizes its reasoning process
and writes a similar answer
to the first types of model.
But in DeepSeek's case, which is part
of why this was so popular
even outside the AI community,
is that you can see how the language model
is breaking down problems.
And then, you get this answer.
On a technical side,
they train the model to
do this specifically,
where they have a section
which is reasoning,
and then it generates a special token,
which is probably hidden from
the user most of the time,
which says, okay, I'm starting the answer.
So, the model is trained
to do this two-stage process on its own.
If you use a similar model in say, OpenAI,
OpenAI's user interface
is trying to summarize
this process for you nicely
by showing the sections
that the model is doing,
and it'll click through,
it'll say breaking down the
problem, making X calculation,
cleaning the result,
and then the answer will come
for something like OpenAI.
- Maybe it's useful here to go through
like an example of it,
DeepSeek-R1 reasoning.
- Yeah.
So, if you're looking at the screen here,
what you'll see is a screenshot
of the DeepSeek chat app.
And at the top is Thought for 157 seconds
with the dropdown arrow.
Underneath that, if we were in
an app that we were running,
the dropdown arrow would
have the reasoning.
- So, in this case, the question,
the specific question which,
I'm philosophically/pothead-inclined,
so this is asking DeepSeek-R1
for one truly novel insight about humans.
And it reveals the reasoning.
And basically, the truly novel aspect
is what's pushing the
reasoning to constantly,
the model asking itself,
is this truly novel?
So, it's actually challenging
itself to be more novel,
more counterintuitive,
less cringe, I suppose.
So, some of the reasoning
says, this is just snapshots.
Alternatively, humans
have a unique meta-emotion
where they feel emotions
about their own emotions,
e.g, feeling guilty about being angry.
This recursive emotional
layering creates complex
motivational drives that
don't exist in other animals.
The inside is that human
emotions are nested.
So, it's like,
it's reasoning through
how humans feel emotions,
it's reasoning about meta-emotions.
- It's gonna have pages
and pages of this.
- Yeah.
- It's almost too much to actually read,
but it's nice to skim as it's coming.
- It's a stream of con...
It's a James Joyce-like
stream of consciousness.
And then, it goes, wait,
the user wants something
that's not seen anywhere else.
Let me dig deeper.
And consider the human ability
to hold contradictory
beliefs simultaneously.
Cognitive dissonance is known,
but perhaps the function
is to allow flexible
adaptation, so on and so forth.
That really captures
the public imagination,
that holy shit, this isn't...
I mean, intelligence/almost
like an inkling of sentience,
because you're thinking through,
you're self-reflecting,
you're deliberating.
And the final result of
that after 157 seconds
is humans instinctively
convert selfish desires
into cooperative systems
by collectively pretending abstract rules,
money, laws, rights, are real.
These shared hallucinations
act as, quote, games,
where competition is secretly redirected
to benefit the group, turning
conflict into society's fuel.
Pretty profound.
I mean, you know?
Comment-
- This is a potential
digression, but a lot of people have found
that these reasoning models
can sometimes produce
much more eloquent text.
That is at least interesting
example, I think,
depending on how open-minded you are,
you find language models
interesting or not,
and there's a spectrum there.
- Well, it's some of the...
We'll talk about different
benchmarks, and so on.
But some is just a vibe.
Like that in itself is a,
let's say, quote, fire tweet.
- Yeah. (laughs)
- If I'm trying
to produce something, where
people are like, oh shit,
okay, so that's chain of thought.
We'll probably return to it more.
How were they able to
achieve such low cost
on the training and the inference?
Maybe you could talk the training first.
- Yeah, so there's two main techniques
that they implemented
that are probably the
majority of their efficiency.
And then, there's a lot
of implementation details
that maybe we'll gloss over
or get into later that contribute to it.
But those two main things are,
one, is they went to a
mixture of experts model,
which we'll define in a second.
And then, the other thing
is that they invented this new technique
called MLA latent attention.
Both of these are big deals.
Mixture of experts is something
that's been in the literature
for a handful of years.
And OpenAI with GPT-4 was the first one
to productize a mixture of experts model.
And what this means
is when you look at the
common models around
that most people have been able
to interact with that are open.
Think Llama, Llama is a dense model.
i.e, every single parameter
or neuron is activated as
you're going through the model
for every single token you generate.
Now, with a mixture of experts
model, you don't do that.
How does the human actually work is like,
oh, well, my visual cortex
is active when I'm
thinking about vision tasks
and other things.
My amygdala is when I'm scared.
These different aspects of your brain
are focused on different things.
A mixture of experts models
attempts to approximate
this to some extent.
So, nowhere close to what
a brain architecture is,
but different portions
of the model activate.
You'll have a set number
of experts in the model
and a set number that
are activated each time.
And this dramatically
reduces both your training
and inference cost.
Because now, if you think
about the parameter count
as the total embedding space
for all of this knowledge
that you're compressing
down during training,
one, you're embedding this data in,
instead of having to activate
every single parameter,
every single time you're
training or running inference.
Now, you can just activate on a subset.
And the model will learn
which expert to route
to for different tasks.
And so, this is a humongous
innovation in terms of, hey,
I can continue to grow
the total embedding space of parameters.
And so, DeepSeek's model
is 600 something billion parameters.
Relative to Llama 405b,
it's 405 billion parameters.
Llama relative to Llama 70b,
it's 70 billion parameters.
So, this model technically
has more embedding space for information,
to compress all of the world's knowledge
that's on the internet down.
But at the same time,
it is only activating around
37 billion of the parameters.
So, only 37 billion of these parameters
actually need to be computed
every single time you're training data
or inferencing data out of it.
And so, versus again a Llama model,
70 billion parameters must be activated
or 405 billion parameters
must be activated.
So, you've dramatically
reduced your compute cost
when you're doing training and inference
with this mixture of experts architecture.
- So, we break down
where it actually applies
and go into the transformer.
Is that useful?
- Let's go, let's go
into the transformer.
- Okay.
So, the transformer
(Lex laughing)
is a thing that is talked about a lot
and we will not cover every detail.
Essentially, the transformer is built
on repeated blocks of
this attention mechanism,
and then a traditional dense,
fully connected multi-layer perception,
whatever word you want to use
for your normal neural network.
And you alternate these blocks.
There's other details.
And where mixture of experts
is applied is that this dense model.
The dense model holds most of the weights
if you count them in a transformer model.
So, you can get really big gains
from those mixture of experts
on parameter efficiency
at training and inference,
because you get this efficiency
by not activating all of these parameters.
- [Lex] We should also
say that a transformer
is a giant neural network.
- Yeah.
- And then,
there's for 15 years now,
there's what's called the
deep learning revolution.
Networks gotten larger and larger.
And a certain point, the
scaling laws appeared
where people realized...
- This is a scaling law shirt, by the way.
(group laughing)
- Representing.
Scaling laws where it became more
and more formalized that bigger is better
across multiple dimensions
of what bigger means.
But these are all neural
networks we're talking about.
And we're talking about
different architectures
of how to construct these neural networks
such that the training
and the inference on
them is super efficient.
- Yeah, every different type of model
has a different scaling law for it,
which is effectively for
how much compute you put in,
the architecture will get
to different levels of
performance at test tasks.
A mixture of experts is one
of the ones at training time.
Even if you don't consider
the inference benefits,
which are also big.
At training time, your
efficiency with your GPUs
is dramatically improved
by using this architecture
if it is well-implemented.
So, you can get effectively
the same performance model
and evaluation scores with
numbers like 30% less compute.
I think there's gonna be a wide variation,
depending on your implementation
details and stuff.
But it is just important
to realize that this type
of technical innovation is
something that gives huge gains.
And I expect most companies
that are serving their models
to move to this mixture
of experts implementation.
Historically, the reason
why not everyone might do it
is because it's a
implementation complexity,
especially when doing these big models.
So, this is one of the things
that DeepSeek gets credit for
is they do this extremely well.
They do a mixture of
experts extremely well.
This architecture for what
is called DeepSeekMoE.
MoE is the shortened version
of mixture of experts,
is multiple papers old.
This part of their training infrastructure
is not new to these models alone,
and same goes for what Dylan mentioned,
with multi-head latent attention.
This is all about reducing
memory usage during inference.
And same things during training,
by using some fancy low
rank approximation math.
If you get into the details
with this latent attention,
it's one of those things I look at,
and it's like, okay,
they're doing really
complex implementations,
'cause there's other
parts of language models
such as embeddings
that are used to extend
the context length.
The common one that DeepSeek used
is rotary positional impendings,
which is called RoPE.
And if you want to use
RoPE with a normal MoE,
it's a sequential thing.
You take two of the attention matrices
and you rotate them by a
complex value rotation,
which is a matrix multiplication.
With DeepSeek's MLA, with this
new attention architecture,
they need to do some clever things,
because they're not set up the same
and it just makes the implementation
complexity much higher.
So, they're managing all of these things,
and these are probably the
sort of things that OpenAI,
these closed labs are doing.
We don't know if they're doing
the exact same techniques,
but they actually shared
them with the world,
which is really nice to be like,
this is the cutting edge
of efficient language model training.
- And some of this requires
low level engineering,
just is a giant mess in trickery.
So, as I understand, that went below CUDA,
so they go super low programming of GPUs.
- Effectively, Nvidia builds
this library called NCCL.
In which, when you're training a model,
you have all these communications
between every single layer of the model
and you may have over 100 layers.
- What does the NCCL
stand for? It's N-C-C-L?
- Nvidia Communications
Collectives Library.
- [Lex] Nice.
(Nathan laughing)
Damn.
- And so,
(group laughing)
when you're training a model,
you're gonna have all
reduces and all gathers.
Between each layer, between
the multi-layer perception
or feedforward network
and the attention mechanism you'll have,
you'll have basically
the model synchronized.
Or you'll have all reduce and all gather.
And this is a communication
between all the GPUs in the network,
whether it's in training or inference.
So, Nvidia has a standard library.
This is one of the reasons
why it's really difficult
to use anyone else's hardware for training
is because no one's really built
a standard communications library.
And Nvidia's done this at a higher level.
At DeepSeek, because they
have certain limitations
around the GPUs that they have access to,
the interconnects are
limited to some extent
by the restrictions of the GPUs
that were shipped into China legally,
not the ones that are smuggled,
but legally shipped in,
that they used to train this model.
They had to figure out
how to get efficiencies.
And one of those things is that instead
of just calling the Nvidia library NCCL,
they instead created their,
they scheduled their own communications,
which some of the labs do.
Meta talked about in Llama 3
how they made their own
custom version of NCCL.
They didn't talk about the
implementation details.
This is some of what they did.
Probably not as well as,
maybe not as well as DeepSeek
because DeepSeek necessity
is the mother of innovation
and they had to do this.
Whereas in the ca...
OpenAI has people
that do this sort of stuff,
Anthropic, et cetera.
But DeepSeek certainly did it publicly
and they may have done it even better
because they were gimp on a certain aspect
of the chips that they have access to.
And so, they scheduled communications
by scheduling specific SMs.
SMs you could think of as
like the core on a GPU.
So, there's hundreds of cores
or there's a bit over
100 cores, SMs, on a GPU,
and they were specifically scheduling,
hey, which ones are running the model?
Which ones are doing all reduce?
Which one are doing all gather?
And they would flip back
and forth between them.
And this requires extremely
low level programming.
- This is what NCCL does automatically
or other Nvidia libraries
handle this automatically usually.
- Yeah, exactly.
And so, technically, they're using PTX,
which is like, you could think of it
as like an assembly type language.
It's not exactly that or instruction set.
Coding directly to assembly
or instruction set.
It's not exactly that,
but that's still part of technically CUDA.
But it's like, do I wanna write in Python,
PyTorch equivalent, and
call Nvidia libraries?
Do I want to go down to the C level.
Or in code, even lower level?
Or do I wanna go all the way down
to the assembly or ISA level?
And there are cases
where you go all the way down
there at the very big labs,
but most companies just do not do that
because it's a waste of time
and the efficiency gains
you get are not worth it.
But DeepSeek's
implementation is so complex.
Especially with their mixture of experts.
People have done mixture of experts,
but they're generally 8, 16 experts.
And they activate too.
So, one of the words
that we like to use is
sparsity factor or usage.
So, you might have four, one
fourth of your model activate.
And that's what misdraws mixed role model.
They're model that really
catapulted them to like,
oh my god, they're really, really good.
OpenAI has also had models that are MoE,
and so have all the other
labs that are major closed.
But what DeepSeek did that
maybe only the leading labs
have only just started recently doing
is have such a high sparsity factor.
It's not one fourth of the model.
Two out of eight experts activating
every time you go through the model.
It's 8 out of 256.
- And there's different
implementations from mixture
of experts where you can
have some of these experts
that are always activated,
which this just looks like
a small neural network.
And then, all the tokens go through that.
And then, they also go through some
that are selected by
this routing mechanism.
And one of the innovations
in DeepSeek's architecture
is that they change the routing mechanism
in mixture of expert models.
There's something called
an auxiliary loss,
which effectively means during training,
you want to make sure
that all of these experts
are used across the tasks
that the model sees.
Why there can be failures
in mixture of experts
is that when you're doing this training,
the one objective is
token prediction accuracy.
And if you just let turning go
with a mixture of expert
model on your own,
it can be that the model learns
to only use a subset of the experts.
And in the MoE literature,
there's something called
the auxiliary loss,
which helps balance them.
But if you think about the loss
functions of deep learning,
this even connects to the bitter lesson,
is that you want to have
the minimum inductive bias
in your model to let the
model learn maximally.
And this auxiliary loss,
this balancing across experts
could be seen as intention
with the prediction
accuracy of the tokens.
So, we don't know the exact extent
that the DeepSeek MoE change,
which is instead of
doing an auxiliary loss,
they have an extra
parameter in their routing,
which after the batches,
they update this parameter to make sure
that the next batches all
have a similar use of experts.
And this type of change can be big,
it can be small, but
they add up over time.
And this is the sort of thing
that just points to them innovating.
And I'm sure all the labs
that are training big MoEs
are looking at this sort of things,
which is getting away
from the auxiliary loss.
Some of them might already use it,
but you keep accumulating gains.
And we'll talk about the
philosophy of training
and how you organize these organizations.
And a lot of it is just
compounding small improvements
over time in your data,
in your architecture,
in your post-training,
and how they integrate with each other.
And DeepSeek does the same thing
and some of 'em are shared or a lot,
we have to take them on face value
that they share their
most important details.
The architecture and the
weights are out there,
so we're seeing what they're
doing, and it adds up.
- Going back to the efficiency
and complexity point.
It's 32 versus 4 for mixed draw
and other MoE models that
have been publicly released.
So, this ratio is extremely high.
And what Nathan was getting at there was,
when you have such a
different level of sparsity,
you can't just have every
GPU have the entire model.
The model's too big, there's
too much complexity there.
So, you have to split up the model
with different types of parallelism.
And so, you might have different experts
on different GPU nodes,
but now what happens when
this set of data that you get,
hey, all of it looks like this one way
and all of it should route
to one part of my model.
So, when all of it routes
to one part of the model,
then you can have this overloading
of a certain set of the GPU resources
or a certain set of the GPUs,
and then the rest of the
training network sits idle,
because all of the tokens
are just routing to that.
So, this is the biggest complexity,
one of the big complexities
with running a very sparse
mixture of experts model,
i.e, this 32 ratio versus this 4 ratio,
is that you end up with so many
of the experts just sitting there idle.
So, how do I load balance between them?
How do I schedule the
communications between them?
This is a lot of the extremely
low level detailed work
that they figured out in the public first
and potentially second
or third in the world,
and maybe even first in some cases.
- What lesson do you, in the direction
of the bitter lesson, do
you take from all of this?
Is this going to be the direction
where a lot of the gain is going to be,
which is this kind of
low level optimization?
Or is this a short-term thing
where the biggest gains will be more
on the algorithmic high
level side of post-training?
Is this like a short-term leap
because they've figured out like a hack,
because constraints, necessity
is the mother of invention,
or is there still a lot of gains?
- I think we should summarize
what the bitter lesson actually is about,
is that the bitter lesson,
- Okay.
- essentially, if you paraphrase it,
is that the types of training
that will win out in deep learning
as we go are those methods
that are which are scalable
in learning and search
is what it calls out.
And the scale word gets a
lot of attention in this.
The interpretation that
I use is effectively
to avoid adding the human
priors to your learning process.
And if you read the original essay,
this is what it talks about
is how researchers will try to come up
with what clever solutions
to their specific problem
that might get them small
gains in the short-term
while simply enabling
these deep learning systems
to work efficiently.
And for these bigger
problems in the long-term
might be more likely to scale
and continue to drive success.
And therefore, we were talking
about relatively small
implementation changes
to the mixture of experts model.
And therefore, it's like, okay,
we will need a few more
years to know if one
of these were actually really
crucial to the bitter lesson.
But the bitter lesson is really
this long-term arc of how
simplicity can often win.
And there's a lot of
sayings in the industry,
like the models just wanna learn.
You have to give them
the simple loss landscape
where you put compute through the model,
and they will learn and getting
barriers out of the way.
- That's where the power,
something like NCCL comes in,
where standardized code
that could be used by a lot of people
to create sort of simple
innovations that can scale.
Which is why the hacks,
I imagine the code base
for DeepSeek is probably a giant mess.
- I'm sure they have,
DeepSeek definitely has code
bases that are extremely messy,
where they're testing these new ideas,
multi-head latent attention,
probably could start in
something like a Jupyter Notebook
or somebody try something on a few GPUs.
And that is really messy.
But the stuff that trains the DeepSeek-V3
and DeepSeek-R1, those libraries,
if you were to present them to us,
I would guess are extremely
high quality code.
- It's a high quality readable code. Yeah.
- I think there is one
aspect to note though.
Is that there is the general ability
for that to transfer across
different types of runs.
You may make really,
really high quality code
for one specific model architecture
at one size.
- Yeah.
- And then, that is not transferable to,
hey, when I make this architecture tweak,
everything's broken again.
That's something that could be
with their specific low level
coding of scheduling SMs,
is specific to this model
architecture and size.
And whereas like Nvidia's
collectives library
is more like, hey,
it'll work for anything.
You wanna do an all reduce, great,
I don't care what your model
architecture is, it'll work.
And you're giving up a lot of performance
when you do that in many cases.
But it's worthwhile for them
to do the specific optimization
for the specific run,
given the constraints that
they have regarding compute.
- I wonder how stressful it is to like,
these frontier models,
like initiate training,
like to have the code-
- [Nathan] Push the button.
- to push the button
(Nathan laughing)
that you're now spending
a large amount of money
and time to train this.
There must be a lot of
innovation on the debugging stage
of making sure there's no
issues that you're monitoring
and visualizing every aspect
of the training, all that kind of stuff.
- When people are training,
they have all these various dashboards,
but the most simple one
- Yeah.
- is your loss.
- Right.
- And it continues to go down.
But in reality,
especially with more
complicated stuff like MoE,
the biggest problem with it,
or FP8 training, which
is another innovation,
going to a lower precision number format,
i.e, less accurate, is that
you end up with loss spikes.
And no one knows why
the loss spike happened.
And for a lot-
- Some of them you do.
- Some of them you do.
- Some of them are bad data.
I give AI2's example
of what blew up our earlier models
is a subreddit called Microwave Gang.
We love to shoutout this out.
(Lex laughing)
It's a real thing.
You can pull up Microwave Gang.
Essentially, it's a subreddit
where everybody makes posts
that are just the letter M.
So, it's like, mm.
So, there's extremely long sequences
of the letter M, and then the
comments are like, beep beep.
'Cause it's in the microwave end.
- Yeah.
- If you pass this
into a model that's trained
to be a normal producing text,
it's extremely high loss.
'Cause normally,
- Yeah.
- you see an M.
(Lex laughing)
You don't predict Ms for a long time.
So, this is something that
cause a loss spikes for us.
But when you have much like,
this is old, this is not recent.
And when you have more
mature data systems,
that's not the thing that
causes the loss spike.
And what Dylan is saying is true,
but it's levels to this sort of idea.
- With regards to the stress,
(Nathan and Lex laughing)
these people are like,
you'll go out to dinner
with a friend that works
at one of these labs.
And they'll just be like
(Nathan laughing)
looking at their phone every 10 minutes,
and they're not like...
It's one thing if they're texting,
but they're just like,
- Yeah.
- is the loss-
- It's literal.
The tokens per second loss, not blown up.
They're just watching this. (chuckles)
- And the heart rate goes
up if there's a spike.
- And some level of spikes is normal.
It'll recover and be back.
Sometimes a lot of the
old strategy was like,
you just stop the run,
restart from an old version,
and then change the data
mix, and then it keeps going.
- There are even
different types of spikes.
So, Dirk Groeneveld has a theory of AI too
that's like fast spikes and slow spikes,
where there are sometimes where
you're looking at the loss
and there are other parameters,
you can see it start to
creep up, and then blow up.
And that's really hard to recover from.
So, you have to go back much further.
So, you have the stressful
period, where it's like flat
or it might start going up
and you're like, what do I do?
Whereas there are also lost
spikes that are, it looks good.
And then, there's one spiky data point.
And what you could do
is you just skip those.
You see that there's a spike.
You're like, okay, I can ignore this data,
don't update the model,
and do the next one, and
it'll recover quickly.
But these like untrickier implementation,
so as you get more complex
in your architecture
and you scale up to more GPUs,
you have more potential
for your loss blowing up.
So, it's like there's
a distribution.
- And then,
the whole idea of grokking also comes in.
It's like, just because it's
slowed down from improving
and loss doesn't mean it's not learning,
because all of a sudden,
it could be like this
and it could just spike down in loss again
because it learned,
truly learned something.
And it took some time
for it to learn that.
It's not like a gradual process.
And that's what humans are like,
that's what models are like.
It's really a stressful
task as you mentioned.
- And the whole time, the
dollar count is going up.
- Every company has failed runs.
You need failed run
to push the envelope
on your infrastructure.
So, a lot of news cycles
are made of X company had Y failed run.
Every company that's trying
to push the frontier of AI has these.
So, yes, it's noteworthy
because it's a lot of money
and it can be week to month setback,
but it is part of the process.
- But how do you get, if you're DeepSeek,
how do you get to a place where holy shit,
there's a successful
combination of hyperparameters?
- A lot of small failed runs.
- And so, rapid iteration
(Nathan chuckles)
through failed runs,
until-
- Yeah, and successful ones.
You just-
- And then, you build up
some intuition like this,
this mixture of expert works,
and then this implementation of MLA works.
- Key hyperparameters like learning rate
and regularization and things like this.
And you find the regime that
works for your code base.
Talking to people at Frontier
Labs, there's a story
that you can tell where
training language models
is kind of a path that you need to follow.
So, you need to unlock the ability
to train a certain type of
model or a certain scale.
And then, your code base
and your internal knowhow
of which hyperparameters
work for it is known.
And you look at the
DeepSeek papers and models,
they've scaled up,
they've added complexity,
and it's just continuing
to build the capabilities that they have.
- There's the concept of a YOLO run.
(Nathan laughing)
So, YOLO, you only live once.
- Yep.
- And what it is, is like,
there's all this experimentation
you do at the small-scale.
Research ablations, you have
your Jupyter Notebook with,
you're experimenting with MLA
on three GPUs or whatever,
and you're doing all these
different things like, hey,
do I do 4 expert, 4 active
experts, 128 experts,
do I arrange the experts this way?
All these different
model architecture things
you're testing at a very small-scale.
Couple researchers,
few GPUs, tens of GPUs,
hundreds of GPUs, whatever it is.
And then, all of a sudden,
you're like, okay guys,
no more fucking around.
No more screwing around.
Everyone, take all the resources we have,
let's pick what we think will
work, and just go for it.
YOLO.
- Yeah.
- And this is where that sort
of stress comes in is like,
well, I know it works here,
but some things that work
here don't work here,
and some things that work
here don't work down here
- Yeah.
- in this terms of scale.
So, it's really truly a YOLO run,
and there's this discussion
of certain researchers
just have this methodical nature.
They can find the whole search space
and figure out all the
ablations of different research,
and really see what is best.
And there's certain
researchers who just like,
have that innate gut instinct of like,
this is the YOLO run.
I'm looking at the data,
(Dylan drowns out Nathan)
I think this is it.
- This is why you wanna
work in post-training,
because the GPU cost
for training is lower.
So, you can make a higher percentage
of your training runs YOLO runs
- Yeah.
- For now.
- Yeah, for now, for now.
- For now, for now. (laughs)
- So, some of this is
fundamentally luck still.
- Luck is skill in many cases.
- Yeah, it looks lucky right when you're-
- But the hill to climb, if
you're on one of these labs
and you have an evaluation
and you're not crushing,
there's a repeated playbook
of how you improve things.
There are localized improvements,
which might be data improvements.
And these add up
into the whole model
just being much better.
And when you zoom in really close,
it can be really obvious
that this model's just
really bad at this thing
and we can fix it.
And you just add these up.
So, some of it feels like luck,
but on the ground,
especially with these new
reasoning models we're talking to,
is just so many ways
that we can poke around.
And normally, it's that some
of them give big improvements.
- The search space is near infinite.
And yet, the amount of compute
and time you have is very low.
And you have to hit release schedules,
you have to not get
blown past by everyone.
Otherwise, what happened with DeepSeek
crushing Meta and Misral and Cohere,
and all these guys, they moved too slow.
They maybe were too methodical.
I don't know, they
didn't hit the YOLO run,
whatever the reason was,
maybe they weren't as skill.
You can call it luck if you want,
but at the end of the day, it's skill.
- So, 2025 is the year of the YOLO run.
It seems like all the labs are going in.
- I think it's even more
impressive what OpenAI did in 2022.
At the time, no one believed in mixture
of experts models at Google
who had all the researchers.
OpenAI had such little compute
and they devoted all of their
compute for many months,
all of it, 100% for many months, to GPT-4,
with a brand new architecture
with no belief that, hey,
let me spend a couple $100 million,
which is all of the money
I have, on this model.
That is truly YOLO,
right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Now, people are like,
all these training run
failures that are in the media,
it's like, okay, great,
but actually, a huge chunk of
my GPs are doing inference.
I still have a bunch
doing research constantly.
And yes, my biggest cluster is training,
but on this YOLO run,
but that YOLO run is much less risky
than what OpenAI did in 2022,
or maybe what DeepSeek did now,
or like, hey, we're just
gonna throw everything at it.
- The big winners throughput human history
are the ones who are willing
to do YOLO at some point.
Okay.
What do we understand
about the hardware it's been trained on?
DeepSeek.
- DeepSeek is very interesting.
A second to take us
to zoom out out of who
they are, first of all.
High-Flyer is a hedge fund
that has historically
done quantitative trading
in China as well as elsewhere.
And they have always had a
significant number of GPUs.
In the past, a lot of these
high frequency trading,
algorithmic, quant traders, used FPGAs,
but it shifted to GPUs, definitely.
And there's both.
But GPUs especially, and High-Flyer,
which is the hedge fund
that owns DeepSeek.
And everyone who works for DeepSeek
is part of High-Flyer to some extent.
Same parent company, same owner, same CEO.
They had all these resources
and infrastructure for trading,
and then they devoted a
humongous portion of them
to training models, both
language models and otherwise.
Because these techniques
were heavily AI-influenced.
More recently, people have realized,
hey, trading with, even when
you go back to Renaissance
and all these quantitative firms,
natural language processing
is the key to trading really fast,
understanding a press release
and making the right trade.
And so, DeepSeek has always
been really good at this.
And even as far back as 2021,
they have press releases
and papers saying like, hey,
we're the first company in China
with an A100 cluster this large.
It was 10,000 A100 GPUs. This is in 2021.
Now, this wasn't all for
training large language models.
This is mostly for training models
for their quantitative aspects,
or quantitative trading,
as well as a lot of that
was natural language
processing, to be clear.
And so, this is the history.
So, verifiable fact is that in 2021,
they built the largest
cluster, at least they claim
it was the largest cluster
in China, 10,000 GPUs.
- Before expert controls started.
- Yeah.
- It's like,
they've had a huge cluster
before any conversation
of export controls.
So, then you step it forward to like,
what have they done over the
last four years since then?
Obviously, they've continued
to operate the hedge fund,
probably make tons of money.
And the other thing
is that they've leaned more
and more and more into AI.
the CEO, Liang Wenfeng, Liang-
- You're not putting me on spot on this.
We discussed this. (laughs)
- Liang Feng, the CEO,
he owns maybe-
- We're all fam. (chuckles)
- Liang Feng, he owns maybe
a little bit more than half
the company, allegedly,
an extremely like
Elon-Jensen kind of figure,
where he is just involved in everything.
And so, over that time period,
he's gotten really in depth into AI.
He actually has a bit of a like a,
if you see some of his statements,
a bit of an EAC vibe almost.
- Total AGI vibes.
And like, we need to do this,
we need to make a new ecosystem of OpenAI.
We need China to lead on
this sort of ecosystem,
because historically,
the Western countries have
led on software ecosystems,
and straight up acknowledges,
in order to do this, we need
to do something different.
DeepSeek is his way of doing this.
Some of the translated interviews with him
are fantastic.
- So, he has done interviews?
- Yeah.
- Do you think
he would do a Western interview or no?
Or is there controls
on the channel?
- There hasn't been one yet,
but I would try it.
- Okay. All right.
(Nathan laughing)
Well, I just got
a Chinese translator, so it was great.
This is all push.
So, fascinating figure, engineer
pushing full on into AI,
leveraging the success from
the high frequency trading.
- Very direct quotes,
like we will not switch
to closed source when
asked about this stuff.
Very long-term motivated
in how the ecosystem of AI should work.
And I think from a Chinese perspective,
he wants a Chinese company
to build this vision.
- And so, this is like the,
quote, unquote, "visionary
behind the company".
This hedge fund still exists,
this quantitative firm.
And so, DeepSeek is the sort of,
solely, he got turned to this full view
of like AI, everything about this.
But at some point,
it slowly maneuvered and he made DeepSeek.
And DeepSeek has done
multiple models since then.
They've acquired more and more GPUs.
They share infrastructure with the fund.
And so, there is no exact number
of public GPU resources that they have,
but besides this 10,000 GPUs
that they bought in 2021,
and they were fantastically profitable.
And then, this paper claims
they did only 2,000 H800 GPUs,
which are a restricted GPU
that was previously allowed in China,
but no longer allowed,
and there's a new version.
But it's basically
Nvidia's H100 for China.
And there's some restrictions on it,
specifically around the
communications sort of speed,
the interconnect speed,
which is why they had to do
this crazy SM scheduling stuff.
So, going back to that.
It's like this is obviously
not true in terms of
their total GPU count.
- Obvious available GPUs.
But for this training run,
you think 2,000 is the
correct number or no?
- So, this is where it
takes a significant amount
of zoning in.
What do you call your training run?
You count all of the research
and ablations that you ran,
picking all this stuff,
because, yes, you can do a YOLO run,
but at some level,
you have to do the test
at the small-scale,
and then you have to do
some test at medium-scale
before you go to a large-scale.
- Accepted practices
that for any given model
that is a notable advancement,
you're gonna do 2 to 4x compute
of the full training run
in experiments alone.
- So, a lot of this compute
that's being scaled up
is probably used in large part
at this time for research.
- Yeah.
And research begets the new ideas
that lets you get huge efficiency-
- Research gets you o1.
Research gets you breakthrough,
so you need to bet on it.
- So, some of the pricing strategy
that we'll discuss has the
research baked into the price.
- So, the numbers that DeepSeek
specifically said publicly
are just the 10,000 GPUs in 2021,
and then 2,000 GPUs for only
the pre-training for V3.
They did not discuss cost on R1.
They did not discuss
cost on all the other RL,
for the instruct model that they made.
They only discussed the
pre-training for the base model,
and they did not discuss anything
on research and ablations.
And they do not talk
about any of the resources
that are shared in terms of, hey,
the fund is using all these GPUs.
And we know that they're very profitable
in that 10,000 GPUs in 2021.
So, some of the research that we've found
is that we actually believe
they have closer to 50,000 GPUs.
- We, as SemiAnalysis,
so we should say
- Yeah.
- that you're one of the
world experts in figuring out
what everybody's doing in
terms of the semiconductor,
in terms of cluster buildouts,
in terms of who's doing what
in terms of training runs.
So, yeah. So, that's the we.
Okay, go ahead.
- Yeah, sorry, sorry.
We believe they actually
have something closer
to 50,000 GPUs.
- Yeah.
- [Dylan] Now, this is
split across many tasks.
Again, the fund, research and ablations.
- For ballpark, how much
would OpenAI or Anthropic had?
I think the clearest example we have,
because Meta is also open,
they talk about order of 60k
to a 100k H100 equivalent GPUs
in their training clusters.
- Right. So, like Llama 3,
they trained on 16,000 H100s.
But the company of Meta last year
publicly disclosed they bought
like 400 something thousand GPUs.
- Yeah. (chuckles)
- So, of course,
tiny percentage on the training.
Again, most of it is like
serving me the best
Instagram reels, or whatever.
- We could get into a cost
of like, what is the cost
of ownership for a
2,000-GPU cluster, 10,000?
There's just different sizes of companies
that can afford these things,
and DeepSeek is reasonably big.
Their compute allocation compared
is one of the top few in the world.
It's not OpenAI, Anthropic, et cetera,
but they have a lot of compute.
- Can you in general,
actually just zoom out
and also talk about the
Hopper architecture,
the Nvidia Hopper GPU architecture,
and the difference between H100 and H800,
like you mentioned the interconnects.
- Yeah, so Ampere was the
A100, and then H100, Hopper.
People use them synonymously in the US
because really, there's just
H100 and now there's H200.
But same thing mostly.
In China, they've had two,
there've been different
salvos of export restrictions.
So, initially, the US government
limited on a two-factor scale,
which is chip interconnect versus FLOPS.
So, any chip that had
interconnects above a certain level
and FLOPS above a certain
floating point operations,
above a certain level, was restricted.
Later, the government realized
that this was a flaw in the restriction,
and they cut it down to just
floating point operations.
And so-
- H800 had high FLOPS,
low communication.
- Exactly.
So, the H800 was the same
performance as H100 on FLOPS,
but it just had the
interconnect bandwidth cut.
DeepSeek knew how to utilize this res...
Hey, even though we're cut
back on the interconnect,
we can do all this fancy stuff
to figure out how to use
the GPU fully anyways.
And so, that was back in October, 2022.
But later in 2023, into
2023 implemented in 2024,
the US government banned the H800.
And so, by the way, this H800 cluster,
these 2,000 GPUs was not
even purchased in 2024.
It was purchased in late 2023.
- [Lex] Mm-hmm.
- And they're just
getting the model out now,
because it takes a lot
of research, et cetera.
H800 was banned and now there's
a new chip called the H20.
The H20 is cutback on only FLOPS,
but the interconnect
bandwidth is the same.
And in fact, in some ways,
it's better than the H100
because it has better memory
bandwidth and memory capacity.
So, there are, Nvidia's
working within the constraints
of what the government sets,
and then builds the best
possible GPU for China.
- Can we take this actual tangent
and we'll return back to the hardware?
Is the philosophy,
the motivation, the case for
export controls, what is it?
Dario Amodei just published a blog post
about export controls.
The case he makes is that if
AI becomes super powerful,
and he says by 2026, will
have AGI or super powerful AI,
and that's going to give a
significant, whoever builds that
will have a significant
military advantage.
And so, because the United
States is a democracy,
and as he says, China is authoritarian
or has authoritarian elements,
you want a unipolar world where
the super powerful military,
because of the AI, is
one that's a democracy.
It's a much more complicated
world geopolitically
when you have two superpowers
with super powerful AI
and one is authoritarian.
So, that's the case he makes.
And so, we wanna, the United States
wants to use export controls to slow down,
to make sure that China
can't do these gigantic training runs
that will be presumably
required to build AGI.
- This is very abstract.
I think this can be the goal
of how some people
describe export controls,
is this super powerful AI.
And you touched on the training run idea.
There's not many worlds where
China cannot train AI models.
I think export controls are
decapping the amount of compute
or the density of compute
that China can have.
And if you think about the
AI ecosystem right now,
as all of these AI companies,
revenue numbers are up and to the right,
their AI usage is just continuing to grow,
more Deep user going to inference.
A large part of export
controls, if they work,
is just that the amount of AI
that can be run in China
is going to be much lower.
So, on the training side,
DeepSeek-V3 is a great example,
which you have a very focused team
that can still get to the frontier of AI.
This 2,000 GPUs is not that hard to get,
all considering in the world.
They're still gonna have those GPUs,
they're still gonna be
able to train models.
But if there's gonna be
a huge market for AI,
if you have strong export controls
and you wanna have 100,000 GPUs
just serving the equivalent
of ChatGPT clusters,
with good export controls,
it also just makes it so that
AI can be used much less.
And I think that is a much easier goal
to achieve than trying
to debate on what AGI is.
And if you have these extremely
intelligent autonomous AIs
and data centers, those are the things
that could be running
in these GPU clusters
in the United States, but not in China.
- To some extent, training a
model does effectively nothing.
Like have a model.
- Yeah. (chuckles)
- The thing that Dario is
speaking to is the implementation
of that model once trained
to then create huge economic growth,
huge increases in military capabilities,
huge increases in productivity of people,
betterment of lives, whatever you want
to direct super powerful
AI towards, you can.
But that requires a
significant amounts of compute.
And so, the US government
has effectively said,
and forever, like training
will always be a portion
of the total compute.
We mentioned Meta's 400,000
GPUs, only 16,000 made Llama.
So, the percentage that Meta
is dedicating to inference,
now this might be for
recommendation systems
that are trying to hack our
mind into spending more time
and watching more ads, or if
it's for a super powerful AI
that's doing productive things,
doesn't matter about the exact use
that our economic system decides,
it's that that can be delivered
in whatever way we want.
Whereas with China, export
restrictions, great.
You're never gonna be able
to cut everything off.
And that's like, I think
that's quite a well-understood
by the US government is that
you can't cut everything off.
- [Nathan] And they'll
make their own chips.
They're-
- And they're trying
to make their own chips.
They'll be worse than ours.
But the whole point is to just keep a gap.
- Yeah.
- And therefore,
at some point, as the AI,
in a world where 2, 3% economic growth,
this is really dumb, by the way,
to cut off high tech and
not make money off of it.
But in a world where super
powerful AI comes about,
and then starts creating
significant changes in society,
which is what all the AI leaders
and big tech companies believe, I think.
Super powerful AI is gonna
change society massively.
And therefore, this compounding effect
of the difference in
compute is really important.
There's some sci-fi out
there, where AI is measured
in how much power is delivered to compute.
Or how much is being...
That's a way of thinking about
what's the economic output
is just how much power are
you directing towards that AI?
Should we talk about
reasoning models with this?
As a way that this might be actionable
as something that people can actually see?
So, the reasoning models that
are coming out with R1 and o1,
they're designed to use more compute.
There's a lot of buzzy words
in the AI community about this,
test-time compute, inference
time compute, whatever.
But Dylan has good research on this.
You can get to the specific
numbers on the ratio
of when you train a model,
you can look at things
about the amount of
compute used at training
and amount of compute use inference.
These reasoning models
are making inference
way more important to doing complex tasks.
In the fall in December,
their OpenAI announced this o3 model.
There's another thing in
AI, when things move fast,
we get both announcements and releases.
Announcements are essentially blog posts
where you pat yourself on the back
and you say you did things.
And releases are on the models out there,
the papers out there, et cetera.
So, OpenAI has announced o3,
and we can check if o3-mini is out
as of recording potentially,
but that doesn't really change the point,
which is that the breakthrough result
was something called ARC-AGI task,
which is the abstract reasoning corpus,
a task for artificial
general intelligence.
Francois Chollet is the guy who's been...
It's a multi-year old paper.
It's a brilliant benchmark.
And the number for OpenAI o3 to solve this
was that it used as some
number of samples in the API,
the API has thinking effort
and number of samples.
They used a thousand
samples to solve this task.
And it comes out to be
like 5 to $20 per question,
which you're putting in
effectively a math puzzle.
And then, it takes orders of
dollars to answer one question.
And this is a lot of compute.
If those are gonna take off in the US,
OpenAI needs a ton of GPUs
on inference to capture this.
They have this OpenAI
ChatGPT Pro subscription,
which is $200 a month.
- [Dylan] Which Sam said
they're losing money on.
- Which means that people
are burning a lot of GPUs on inference.
And I've signed up with
it, I've played with it.
I don't think I'm a
power user, but I use it.
That is the thing that a Chinese company
with mediumly strong export controls,
there will always be loopholes,
might not be able to do it all.
And if that, the main result
for o3 is also a spectacular
coding performance.
And if that feeds back
into AI companies being
able to experiment better.
- So, presumably the idea is for an AGI,
a much larger fraction of the compute
would be used for this test-time
compute for the reasoning,
for the AGI goes into a room
and thinks about how
to take over the world
and come back in 2.7 hours.
- This is what-
- And that it's gonna take
a lot of compute.
- This is what people
like CEO or leaders of OpenAI
and Anthropic talk about is
like autonomous AI models,
which is you give them a task
and they work on it in the background.
I think my personal definition
of AGI is much simpler.
I think language models are a form of AGI
and all of this super
powerful stuff is a next step
that's great if we get these tools.
But a language model has so
much value in so many domains.
It is a general intelligence to me.
But this next step of agentic things
where they're independent
and they can do tasks that
aren't in the training data
is what the few year outlook
that these AI companies are driving for.
- I think the terminology here
that Dario uses as super powerful AI.
So, I agree with you on the AGI.
I think we already have something
like that's exceptionally impressive
that Alan Turing would
for sure say is AGI.
But he's referring more to
something once in possession of,
than you would have a significant military
and geopolitical advantage
over other nations.
So, it's not just like you can
ask it how to cook an omelet.
- And he has a much more positive view.
And as I say, machines of love and grace.
- Yes.
- I've read into this.
I don't have enough background
in physical sciences
to gauge exactly how confident I am
in if AI can revolutionize biology.
I am safe saying that AI is
going to accelerate the progress
of any computational science.
- So, we're doing a depth-first
search here on topics,
taking tangent of a tangent.
So, let's continue on
that depth-first search.
You said that you're both feeling the AGI,
so what's your timeline?
(Nathan chuckles)
Dario's 2026 for the super powerful AI
that's basically agentic to a degree,
where it's a real security
threat, that level of AGI.
What's your timeline?
- I don't like to attribute
specific abilities
because predicting specific
abilities and when is very hard.
I think mostly if you're gonna say
that I'm feeling the AGI
is that I expect continued
rapid surprising progress
over the next few years.
So, something like R1 is less surprising
to me from DeepSeek,
because I expect there to be new paradigms
where substantial progress can be made.
I think DeepSeek-R1 is so unsettling,
because we're on this path with ChatGPT,
it's like it's getting better,
it's getting better, it's getting better.
And then, we have a new direction
for changing the models.
And we took one step like
this and we took a step up.
So, it looks like a really fast slope.
And then, we're gonna
just take more steps.
So, this is really unsettling
when you have these big steps.
And I expect that to keep happening.
I've tried OpenAI Operator,
I've tried Claude computer
use, they're not there yet.
I understand the idea,
but it's just so hard to
predict what is the breakthrough
that'll make something like that work.
And I think it's more likely
that we have breakthroughs that work
and things that we don't
know what they're gonna do.
So, everyone wants agents.
Dario has a very eloquent
way of describing this.
And I just think that it's like,
there's gonna be more than that.
So, just expect these things to come.
- I'm gonna have to try to pin you down
to a date on the AGI timeline, (chuckles)
like the nuclear weapon moment.
So, moment where on
the geopolitical stage.
There's a real, like,
'cause we're talking
about export controls,
when do you think just
even to throw out a date,
when do you think that would be?
For me, it's probably after 2030,
so I'm not as-
- That's what I would say.
- So, define that.
Because to me, it almost
has already happened.
You look at elections
in India and Pakistan,
people get AI voice calls,
and think they're talking
to the politician.
The AI diffusion rules,
which was enacted in the last couple weeks
of the Biden admin and looks
like the Trump admin will keep,
and potentially even strengthen,
limit cloud computing and GPU sales
to countries that are not even
related to China, it's like.
This is-
- Portugal
and all these like normal countries
are on the-
- Yeah, and it's like-
- You need approval from the US list.
- Like, yeah, Portugal
and like all these
countries that are allies.
- Yup.
- Singapore.
They freaking have F-35s and
we don't let them buy GPUs.
- Mm-hmm.
- This to me
is already to the scale of like-
- Well, that just means
that the US military
is really nervous about
this new technology.
That doesn't mean the
technology is already there.
So, they might be just very cautious
about this thing that they
don't quite understand.
But that's a really good
point, the robocalls,
swarms of semi-intelligent
bots could be a weapon,
could be doing a lot
of social engineering.
- There's tons of talk about,
from the 2016 elections
like Cambridge Analytica,
and all this stuff, Russian influence.
Every country in the world
is pushing stuff onto the internet
and has narratives they want.
Every technically competent,
whether it's Russia, China,
US, Israel, et cetera.
People are pushing viewpoints
onto the internet, and mass.
And language models
crash the cost of very
intelligent sounding
language.
- There's some research
that shows that the distribution
is actually a limiting factor.
So, language models haven't
yet made misinformation,
particularly changed the equation there.
The internet is still ongoing.
I think there's a blog, AI Snake Oil,
and some of my friends at Princeton
that write on this stuff.
So, there is research.
It's a default that everyone assumes.
And I would've thought the same thing
is that misinformation
doesn't gonna get far
worse with language models.
I think in terms of internet posts
and things that people
have been measuring,
it hasn't been a exponential increase
or something extremely measurable,
and things you're talking about
with voice calls and stuff like that.
It could be in modalities
that are harder to measure.
So, it's something that it's
too soon to tell in terms of,
I think that's political
instability via the web is very,
it's monitored by a lot
of researchers to see what's happening.
You're asking about the AGI thing.
If you make me give a year,
I'm be like, okay, I
have AI CEOs saying this.
They've been saying two years
for a while.
- Mm-hmm.
- I think that they're people
like Dario at Anthropic,
the CEO has thought about this so deeply.
I need to take their word seriously,
but also understand that they
have different incentives.
So, I would be like,
add a few years to that,
which is how you get
something similar to 2030
or a little after 2030.
- I think to some extent,
we have capabilities
that hit a certain point where
any one person could say,
oh, okay, if I can
leverage those capabilities
for X amount of time, this is AGI.
Call it '27, '28.
But then the cost of actually
operating that capability
- Yeah, this is gonna be
- is
- my point. (chuckles)
- so, so extreme
that no one can actually
deploy it at scale
and mass to actually completely
revolutionize the economy
on a snap of a finger.
So, I don't think it will be like
a snap of the finger moment.
- Yeah, it's a physical
constraint type-
- Rather it'll be a,
oh, the capabilities are here,
but I can't deploy it everywhere.
And so, one simple
example going back to 2023
was when being with GPT-4 came out
and everyone was freaking
out about Search.
- Oh gosh.
- Perplexity came out.
If you did the cost on like, hey,
implementing GPT-3 into
every Google search,
it was like, oh, okay,
this is just like physically
impossible to implement.
And as we step forward
to going back to the test-time
compute thing, a query for...
You asked ChatGPT a
question, it cost cents
for their most capable model
of chat to get a query back.
To solve an ARC-AGI problem
though, cost 5 to 20 bucks.
And this is an a-
- [Nathan] It's only going up from there.
- This is 1,000, 10,000x
factor difference in cost
to respond to a query versus do a task.
And the task of ARC-AGI, it's not like,
it's simple to some extent,
but it's also like what are
the tasks that we want A...
Okay, AGI, quote, unquote,
"what we have today" can do ARC-AGI.
Three years from now,
it can do much more complicated problems,
but the cost is gonna be measured
in thousands and thousands
and hundreds of thousands
of dollars of GPU time,
and there just won't be enough power,
GPUs, infrastructure
- Yeah.
- to operate this, and therefore,
shift everything in the
world on the snap the finger.
But at that moment,
who gets to control and
point the AGI at a task.
And so, this was in Dario's
post that he's like,
hey, China can effectively
and more quickly than us, point
their AGI at military tasks.
And they have been in many ways,
faster at adopting
certain new technologies
into their military, especially
with regards to drones.
The US maybe has a long-standing
large air sort of fighter
jet type of thing, bombers,
but when it comes to
asymmetric arms such as drones,
they've completely leapfrogged
the US and the west.
And the fear that Dario
is pointing out there,
I think, is that, yeah, great,
we'll have AGI in the commercial sector.
The US military won't be able
to implement it super fast.
Chinese military could
and they could direct all their resources
to implementing it in the military,
and therefore solving military logistics
or solving some other
aspect of disinformation
for targeted certain set of people,
so that they can flip
a country's politics,
or something like that, that
is actually like catastrophic
versus the US just wants to,
'cause it'll be more
capitalistic allocated
just towards whatever
- Mm.
- is the highest return on income,
which might be like building
factories better or whatever.
- So, everything I've seen,
people's intuition seems
to fail on robotics.
So, you have this kind
of general optimism.
I've seen this on self-driving cars.
People think it's much
easier problem than it is.
Similar with drones.
Here, I understand it a little bit less,
but I've just seen the
reality of the war in Ukraine
and the usage of drones on both sides.
And it seems that humans
still far outperform any
fully autonomous systems.
AI is an assistant, but
humans drive FPV drones
where the humans controlling most of it
just far, far, far outperforms AI systems.
So, I think it's not obvious to me
that we're going to have swarms
of autonomous robots anytime
soon in the military context.
Maybe the fastest I can imagine is 2030,
which is why I said 2030
for the super powerful AI.
Whenever you have large-scale swarms
of robots doing military actions,
that's when the world just
starts to look different to me.
So, that's the thing I'm
really worried about.
But there could be cyber
war type of technologies
that from social engineering,
to actually just swarms the
robots that find attack vectors
in our code bases,
and shut down power
grids, that kind of stuff.
And it could be one of those things
like on any given weekend or something,
power goes out, nobody knows why,
and the world changes forever.
Just power going out for two days
in all of the United States,
that will lead to murder to chaos.
But going back to export controls,
do you see that as a useful way
to control the balance
of power geopolitically
in the context of AI?
- And I think going back to my viewpoint
is if you believe we're in
this stage of economic growth
and change that we've been
in for the last 20 years,
the export controls
are absolutely guaranteeing
that China will win long-term,
if you do not believe AI
is going to make significant changes
to society in the next
10 years or 5 years.
Five-year timelines are
what the more executives
and such of AI companies
and even big tech companies believe.
But even tenure timelines,
it's reasonable.
But once you get to, hey,
these timelines are
below that time period,
then the only way to
create a sizable advantage
or disadvantage for America
versus China is if you constrain compute.
Because talent is not really
something that's constraining.
China arguably has more talent,
more STEM graduates, more programmers.
The US can draw upon the
world's people, which it does.
There's tons of foreigners
in the AI industry-
- [Nathan] So many of these AI teams
are all people without a US passport.
- Yeah.
(Nathan laughing)
Many of them are Chinese people
who are moving
- Yeah.
- to North America, and that's great.
That's exactly what we want.
But there's that talent is one aspect,
but I don't think that's one
that is a measurable
advantage for the US or not.
It truly is just whether or not compute.
Now, even on the compute side,
when we look at chips versus data centers.
China has the unprecedented ability
to build ridiculous
sums of power clockwork.
They're always building
more and more power.
They've got steel mills that individually
are the size of the entire US industry.
And they've got aluminum mills
that consume gigawatts
and gigawatts of power.
And when we talk about what's
the biggest data center,
OpenAI made this huge
thing about Stargate,
their announcement there,
that's like once it's fully
built out in a few years,
it'll be two gigawatts of power.
And this is still smaller
than the largest industrial
facilities in China.
China, if they wanted to
build the largest data center
in the world, if they had
access to the chips, could.
So, it's just a question of when, not if.
- So, their industrial capacity
far exceeds the United States?
- [Dylan] Exactly.
- To the the manufacture stuff.
- Yeah.
- So, long-term,
they're going to be
manufacturing chips there.
- Chips are a little bit more specialized.
I'm specifically referring
to the data centers.
Chips, fabs take huge amounts
of power, don't get me wrong.
That's not necessarily
the gating factor there.
The gating factor on how fast people
can build the largest clusters
today in the US is power.
Whether it's now it could
be power generation,
power transmission, substations,
and all these sorts of
transformers and all these things,
building the data center,
these are all constraints
on the US industry's
ability to build larger
and larger training systems,
as well as deploying more
and more inference compute.
- I think we need to make the
point clear on why the time
is now for people that
don't think about this,
'cause essentially with export controls,
you're making it so China
cannot make or get cutting edge chips.
And the idea is that
if you time this wrong,
China is pouring a ton of money
into their chip production.
And if you time it wrong,
they're going to have more
capacity for production,
more capacity for energy,
and figure out how to make the chips
and have more capacity
than the rest of the
world to make the chips,
because everybody can buy,
they're gonna sell their
Chinese chips to everybody.
They might subsidize them.
And therefore, if AI takes a long time
to become differentiated,
we've kneecapped the financial performance
of American companies.
Nvidia can sell less.
TSMC cannot sell to China.
So, therefore, we have less demand
to therefore to keep driving
the production cycle.
So, that's the assumption
behind the timing
being important.
- Less than 10 years
or 5 years to above.
China will win because of
these restrictions long-term,
unless AI does something
in the short-term,
which I believe AI will do,
make massive changes to society
in the medium short-term.
And so, that's the big unlocker there.
And even today,
if Xi Jinping decided to get,
quote, unquote, "scale pilled",
i.e, decide that scaling
laws are what matters,
just like the US executives
like Satya Nadella
and Mark Zuckerberg, and Sundar,
and all these US
executives of the biggest,
most powerful tech companies,
have decided they're scale pilled
and they're building
multi-gigawatt data centers.
Whether it's in Texas or
Louisiana, or Wisconsin,
wherever it is, they're
building these massive things
that cost as much as their entire budget
for spending on data centers
globally in one spot.
This is what they've committed to
for next year, year after, et cetera.
And so, they're so convinced
that this is the way that
this is what they're doing.
But if China decided to, they
could do it faster than us.
But this is where the
restrictions come in.
It is not clear that China
as a whole has decided,
from the highest levels
that this is a priority.
The US has.
You see Trump talking about DeepSeek
and Stargate within the same week.
And the Biden admin as well
had a lot of discussions
about AI and such.
It's clear that they think about it.
Only just last week
did DeepSeek meet the
second in command of China.
They have not even met the top,
and haven't met Xi, she hasn't set down.
And they only just released a subsidy
of a trillion RMB, roughly $160 billion,
which is closer to the spending
of like Microsoft and Meta,
and Google combined for this year.
So, it's like they're
realizing it just now.
But that's where these
export restrictions come in
and say, hey, you can't ship
the most powerful US chips to China.
You can ship a cut down version.
You can't ship the most powerful chips
to all these countries
who we know are just
gonna rent it to China.
You have to limit the numbers.
- [Nathan] And the tools.
Same-
- And same
with manufacturing equipment tools,
all these different aspects,
but it all stems from AI,
and then what downstream
can slow them down in AI.
And so, the entire
semiconductor restrictions,
you read them, they're very clear,
it's about AI and military
civil fusion of technology.
It's very clear.
And then, from there, it goes, oh,
well, we're banning them
from buying lithography tools
and etch tools, and deposition tools.
And, oh, this random subsystem
from a random company that's tiny.
Why are we banning this?
Because all of it,
the US government has decided,
is critical to AI systems.
- I think the fulcrum
point is the transition
from seven nanometer to
five nanometer chips,
where I think it was Huawei
that had the seven nanometer
chip a few years ago,
which caused another political brouhaha
almost like this moment.
And then, it's the ASML
deep UV. What is that?
Like extreme ultraviolet lithography.
- To set context on the chips,
what Nathan's referring to is in 2020,
Huawei released their Ascend 910 chip,
which was an AI chip, first
one on seven nanometer
before Google did, before Nvidia did.
And they submitted it
to the MLPerf benchmark,
which is a industry standard
for machine learning
performance benchmark.
And it did quite well.
And it was the best
chip at the submission.
This was a huge deal.
The Trump admin of course
banned, it was 2019,
banned the Huawei
from getting seven
nanometer chips from TSMC.
And so, then they had to switch
to using internal
domestically produced chips,
which was a multi-year setback.
- Many companies have done
seven nanometer chips.
And the question is like, we
don't know how much Huawei
was subsidizing production of that chip.
Intel has made seven nanometer chips
that are not profitable,
and things like this.
So, this is how it all feeds back
into the economic engine
of export controls.
- Well, so you're saying
that for now, Xi Jinping
has not felt the AGI,
but it feels like the DeepSeek moment
- Yeah.
- might like,
there might be meetings going on now,
where he's gonna start
wearing the same T-shirt
and things are gonna escalate.
(Nathan and Dylan laughing)
- He may have woken up last week.
Liang Feng met the second command guy,
and they had a meeting.
And then, the next day, they
announced the AI subsidies,
which are a trillion RMB.
- So, it's possible that
this DeepSeek moment
is truly the beginning of a cold war.
- That's what a lot of
people are worried about.
People in AI have been worried
that this is going towards a cold war
or already is.
- But there is,
it's not DeepSeek's fault,
but there's something,
a bunch of factors came together
where it was like explosion.
- No, history works.
- It all has to do with Nvidia
stock going down problem.
But it's just some
(Nathan laughing)
mass hysteria
(Lex drowns out Nathan)
that happened that eventually led
to Xi Jinping having meetings
and waking up to this idea.
- And the US government
realized in October 7th, 2022,
before ChatGPT released,
that restriction on October 7th,
which dropped and shocked everyone.
And it was very clearly aimed at AI.
Everyone was like, what
the heck are you doing?
- And diffusion was out then,
but not ChatGPT.
- Yeah, but not ChatGPT.
- So, it was like starting
to be rumblings like-
- Of what gen AI can do to society,
but it was very clear, I think,
to at least National Security Council
and those sort of folks
that this was where the world is headed,
this cold war that's happening.
- So, is there any concerns
that the export controls
push China to take
military action on Taiwan?
- This is the big risk.
The further you push China
away from having access
to cutting edge American
and global technologies,
the more likely they are to say,
well, 'cause I can't access
it, I might as well...
No one should access it.
And there's a few
interesting aspects of that.
China has a urban rural
divide like no other.
They have a male/female
birth ratio like no other,
to the point where, if
you look in most of China,
it's like the ratio's not that bad.
But when you look at single
dudes in rural China,
it's like a 30 to 1 ratio.
- Mm-hmm.
- And those are disenfranchised dudes.
Quote, unquote, the US
has an "incel problem"
like China does too.
It's just they're placated
in some way or crushed down.
What do you do with these people?
And at the same time, you're not allowed
to access the most important technology,
at least the US thinks so.
China's maybe starting to think
this is the most important technology
by starting to dump subsidies in it.
They thought EVs and renewables
were the most important technology.
They dominate that now.
Now, they started thinking
about semiconductors
in the late 2010s and early 2020s,
and now they've been dumping money
and they're catching up rapidly,
and they're gonna do the same with AI.
Because they're very talented.
So, the question is like,
when does this hit a breaking point?
And if China sees this as,
hey, they can continue...
If not having access and
starting a true hot war.
Taking over Taiwan or trying
to subvert its democracy
in some way, or blockading it,
hurts the rest of the world
far more than it hurts them,
this is something they
could potentially do.
And so, is this pushing them
towards that? Potentially.
I'm not quite a geopolitical person,
but it's obvious that
the world regime of peace
and trade is super awesome for economics.
But at some point, it could break.
- I think we should
comment why Chinese economy
would be hurt by that is
that they're export-heavy.
I think the United States buys so much,
like if that goes away,
that's how their economy goes.
- Well, also, they just would not be able
to import raw materials
from all over the world.
The US would just shut
down the strait of Malacca
and at the same time, the US entire,
you could argue almost all
the GDP growth in America
since the '70s has been either
population growth or tech.
Because your life today
is not that much better
than someone from the
'80s outside of tech.
Cars, they all have
semiconductors in them everywhere.
Fridges, semiconductors everywhere.
These funny stories about how Russians
were taking apart laundry machines
because they had certain
Texas instrument chips
that they could then repurpose
and put into their
anti-missile missile things,
their S-400 or whatever.
You would know more about this,
but there's all sorts of,
everything about semiconductors
is so integral to every part of our lives.
- So, can you explain the role of TSMC
in this story of
semiconductors and maybe also
how the United States can
break the reliance on TSMC?
- I don't think it's necessarily
breaking their alliance.
I think it's getting
TSMC to build in the US.
So, taking a step back.
TSMC produces most of the world's chips,
especially on the foundry side.
There's a lot of companies
that build their own
chips, Samsung, Intel,
STMicro, Texas Instruments,
Analog Devices,
all these kinds of companies
build their own chips and XP.
But more and more of these companies
are outsourcing to TSMC and
have been for multiple decades.
- Can you explain the supply chain there
and where most of TSMC is
in terms of manufacturing?
- Sure.
So, historically, supply chain was,
companies would build their own chips.
It'd be a company-started,
they'd build their own chips,
and then they'd design the chip
and build the chip, and sell it.
Over time, this became really difficult
because the cost of building a fab
continues to compound
every single generation.
Of course the technology,
figuring out the technology for it
is incredibly difficult regardless,
but just the dollars and cents
that are required ignoring,
saying, hey, yes, I have all
the technical capability,
which it's really hard
to get that, by the way.
Intel's failing, Samsung's
failing, et cetera.
But if you look at just
the dollars to spend
to build that next generation
fab, it keeps growing.
Sort of like Moore's Laws
having the cost of chips every two years.
There's a separate law
that's doubling the cost of
fabs every handful of years.
And so, you look at a leading edge fab
that is gonna be profitable today,
that's building three nanometer chips
or two nanometer chips in the future,
that's gonna cost north
of 30, $40 billion.
And that's just for like a token amount.
That's like the base building blocking,
you probably need to build multiple.
And so, when you look at
the industry, over the last,
if I go back 20, 30
years ago, there were 20,
30 companies that could build
the most advanced chips,
and then they would design
them themselves and sell them.
So, companies like AMD
would build their own chips.
Intel of course still
builds their own chips
they're very famous for.
IBM would build their own chips.
And you could just keep
going down the list.
All these companies built their own chips.
Slowly, they kept falling like flies.
And that's because of what TSMC did.
They created the foundry business model,
which is, I'm not gonna design any chips,
I'm just gonna contract
manufacturer chips for other people.
And one of their early
customers is Nvidia.
Nvidia is the only semiconductor company
that's doing more than a
billion dollars of revenue
that was started in the era of Foundry.
Every other company started before then,
and at some point had fabs,
which is actually incredible.
Like AMD and Intel and Broadcom-
- [Nathan] Such a great fact.
(Nathan drowns out Dylan)
- It's like everyone
(Nathan laughing)
had fabs at some point,
or some companies like Broadcom,
it was like a merger amalgamation
of various companies that rolled up.
But even today, Broadcom has fabs.
They build iPhone, RF radio
chips in Colorado for Apple.
All these companies had fabs,
and for most of the fabs,
they threw them away or sold them off,
or they got rolled into something else.
And now, everyone relies on TSMC.
Including Intel, their latest
PC chip uses TSMC chips.
It also uses some intel chips,
but it uses TSMC process.
- Can you explain why the foundry model
is so successful for these companies?
Why are they going
with TSMC-
- Economies of scale.
- Scale.
- Yeah.
So, like I mentioned, the cost
of building a fab is so high.
The R&D is so difficult.
And when you look at companies
that had their own vertical stack,
there was an antiquated
process of like, okay,
I'm so hyper customized
to each specific chip.
But as we've gone through the history
of the last 50 years of
electronics and semiconductors,
A, you need more and more specialization,
because Moore's Law has died,
Dennard scaling has died.
i.e, chips are not getting
better just for free.
From manufacturing,
you have to make real
architectural innovations.
Google is not just running on
Intel CPUs for web serving.
They have a YouTube chip, they have TPUs,
they have pixel chips, they
have a wide diversity of chips
that generate all the
economic value of Google.
It's running all the services and stuff.
And so, and this is just Google
and you could go across any
company in the industry,
and it's like this.
Cars contain 5,000 chips, 200
different varieties of them.
All these random things.
A Tesla door handle has
two chips. It's ridiculous.
And it's a cool door handle.
You don't think about it,
but it's like, has two really chipped,
like penny chips in there.
Anyways, so as you have
more diversity of chips,
as you have more specialization required,
and the cost of fabs continues
to grow, you need someone
who is laser-focused on building
the best process technology
and making it as flexible as possible.
- I think you could say it simpler,
which is the cost per fab goes up.
And if you are a small player,
that makes a few types of chips.
You're not gonna have the demand
to pay back the cost of the fab.
Whereas Nvidia can have
many different customers
and aggregate all this
demand into one place,
and then they're the only
person that makes enough money
building chips to buy the
next, to build the next fab.
So, this is why the
companies slowly get killed,
'cause they have 10 years ago a chip
that is profitable and is good enough,
but the cost to build
the next one goes up.
They may try to do this, fail,
because they don't have
the money to make it work,
and then they don't have any chips.
Or they build it and it's too
expensive and they just have
not profitable chips.
- Or there's more
failure points of, you could
have one little process-related
to some sort of chemical etch
or some sort of plasma etch,
or some little process that screws up,
you didn't engineer it right,
and now the whole company falls
apart, you can't make chips.
And so, super, super powerful
companies like Intel,
they had the weathering
storm to like, hey,
they still exist today, even
though they really screwed up
their manufacturing six, seven years ago.
But in the case of like AMD,
they almost went bankrupt.
They had to sell their
fabs to Mubadala, UAE.
And that became a separate company
called GlobalFoundries,
which is a foundry firm.
And then, AMD was able to then focus
on the return back up was like,
hey, let's focus on making chiplets
and a bunch of different
chips for different markets.
And focusing on specific workloads
rather than all of these different things.
And so, you get more diversity of chips,
you have more companies
than ever designing chips,
but you have fewer companies
than ever manufacturing them.
And this is where TSMC comes in,
is they've just been the best.
They are so good at it.
They're customer-focused,
they make it easy for you
to fabricate your chips.
They take all of that complexity
and try and abstract a
lot of it away from you.
They make good money, they
don't make insane money,
but they make good money.
And they're able to
aggregate all this demand
and continue to build the next fab,
the next fab, the next fab.
- So, why is Taiwan so special for TSMC?
Why is it happening there?
Can it be replicated
inside the United States?
- Yeah, so there's aspects of it
that I would say yes and
aspects that I'd say no.
TSMC is way ahead,
because Former Executive Morris Chang
of Texas Instruments
wasn't promoted to CEO,
and he is like, screw this,
I'm gonna go make my own chip company.
And he went to Taiwan and made TSMC.
And there's a whole lot more story there.
So, it could have been Texas Instruments,
it could have been TSMC,
but Texas Semiconductor Manufacturing,
instead of Texas Instruments.
(Nathan laughing)
So, there is that whole story there,
but the race-
- Sitting here in Texas.
- And that sounds like a human story,
like it didn't get promoted?
- Just the brilliance of Morris Chang,
which I wouldn't underplay,
but there's also a different
level of how this works.
So, in Taiwan, the number,
top percent of graduates of students
that go to the best school, which is NTU,
the top percent of those
all go work to TSMC.
And guess what their pay is,
their starting pay is
like $80,000, $70,000.
Which is like, that's like starting pay
for a good graduate in the US.
Not the top, the top
graduates are making hundreds
of thousands of dollars at
the Googles and the Amazons,
and now I guess the OpenAIs of the world.
So, there is a large dichotomy of like,
what is the top 1% of the society doing
and where are they headed
because of economic reasons.
Intel never paid that crazy good.
And it didn't make sense to them.
That's one aspect, where's the best going?
Second is the work ethic.
We like to work, you work
a lot, we work a lot,
but at the end of the day,
what is the time and amount
of work that you're doing
and what does a fab require?
Fabs are not work from home jobs.
They are, you go into the
fab and grueling work.
There's, hey, if there is
any amount of vibration.
An earthquake happens,
vibrates the machines,
they're either broken,
you've scrapped some of your production.
And then, in many cases, they're
like calibrated properly.
So, when TSMC, when there's an earthquake,
recently there's been an earthquake,
TSMC doesn't call their employees,
they just go to the fab
and they just show up.
The parking lot gets slammed
and people just go into
the fab and fix it.
It's like ants. It's like a hive of ants.
It doesn't get told by
the queen what to do.
The ants just know.
- It's like one person just
specializes on these one task,
and it's like, you're
gonna take this one tool
and you're the best person in the world,
and this is what you're gonna do
for your whole life is
this one task and the fab.
- Which is like some special chemistry
plus nano manufacturing
on one line of tools
that continues to get iterated.
And yeah, it's like specific plasma etch
for removing silicon dioxide.
That's all you focus on your whole career,
and it's like such a specialized thing.
And so, it's not like the
tasks are transferable.
AI today is awesome,
because people can pick it up like that.
Semiconductor manufacturing
is very antiquated and difficult.
None of the materials
are online for people to
read easily and learn.
The papers are very dense
and it takes a lot of experience to learn.
And so, it makes the barrier
to entry much higher too.
So, when you talk about, hey,
you have all these people
that are super specialized,
they will work 80 hours a
week in a factory, in a fab.
And if anything goes wrong,
they'll go show up in
the middle of the night
because some earthquake,
their wife is like,
"There's an earthquake."
He is like, "Great,
I'm gonna go to the fab."
(Nathan laughing)
- [Nathan] It's like a crime.
- Would you as an American, do that?
It's like these sorts of things are like,
what, I guess are the exemplifying,
like why TSMC is so amazing.
Now, can you replicate it in the US?
Let's not ignore Intel was the leader
in manufacturing for over 20 years.
They brought every technology
to market first besides EUV,
strained silicon,
High-K/Metal Gates, FinFET,
and the list just goes on and on and on
of technologies that Intel
brought to market first,
made the most money from,
and manufactured at scale first,
best, highest profit margins.
So, we shouldn't ignore
that Intel can't do this.
It's that the culture has broken.
You've invested in the wrong things.
They said no to the iPhone.
They had all these different things
regarding mismanagement of the fabs,
mismanagement of designs, this lockup.
And at the same time,
all these brilliant
people, these 50,000 PhDs,
or masters that have been
working on specific chemical,
or physical processes,
or nano manufacturing
processes for decades,
in Oregon, they're still there.
They're still producing amazing work.
It's just like getting it to the last mile
of production at high-yield,
where you can manufacture dozens
and hundreds of different
kinds of chips, and it's good.
Customer experience has broken.
It's that customer experience.
Part of it is like,
people will say Intel was too
pompous in the 2000s, 2010s.
They just thought they
were better than everyone.
The tool guys were like, oh,
I don't think that this is mature enough.
And they're like, ah, you
just don't know what we know.
This sort of stuff would happen.
And so, can the US
bring leading edge semiconductor
manufacturing to the US?
And thematically, yes.
And we are. TS-
- It's happening.
Arizona is getting better
and better as time goes on.
- TSMC has built roughly
20% of their capacity
for five nanometer in the US.
Now, this is nowhere near enough.
20% of capacity in the US is like nothing.
And furthermore, this is still
dependent on Taiwan existing.
There's important way to separate it out.
There's R&D and there's
high volume manufacturing.
Effectively, there are
three places in the world
that are doing leading edge R&D.
There's Hsinchu, Taiwan,
there's Hillsboro, Oregon,
and there is Pyongyang, South Korea.
These three places
are doing the leading
edge R&D for the rest
of the world's leading
edge semiconductors.
Now, manufacturing can be
distributed more globally.
And this is where this dichotomy exists
of who's actually modifying the process,
who's actually developing
the next generation one,
who's improving them?
Is Hsinchu, is Hillsboro, is Pyongyang.
It is not the rest of
these fabs like Arizona.
Arizona is a paperweight.
If Hsinchu disappeared off
the face of the planet,
within a year, couple years,
Arizona would stop producing too.
It's actually like pretty critical.
One of the things I like to
say is if I had a few missiles,
I know exactly where I could
cause the most economic damage.
It's not targeting the White House.
It's not-
- It's the R&D centers.
- It's the R&D centers
for TSMC, Intel, Samsung,
and then some of the memory
guys, Micron and Hynix.
- Because they define the future evolution
of these semiconductors and
everything's moving so rapidly
that it really is fundamentally about R&D.
And it is all about TSMC, huh?
- And so, TSMC,
you cannot purchase a
vehicle without TSMC chips.
You cannot purchase a
fridge without TSMC chips.
I think one of the few things
you can purchase ironically
is a Texas Instruments
graphing calculator,
because they actually
manufacture in Texas.
But outside of that, like a laptop,
- It's depressing.
- a phone, anything you,
servers, GPUs, none of
this stuff can exist.
And this is without TSMC.
And in many cases, it's not
even like the leading edge,
sexy five nanometer chip,
three nanometer chip, two nanometer chip.
Oftentimes, it's just some stupid power IC
that's converting from
some voltage to another,
and it's made at TSMC.
- This is what China is
investing in as well.
It's like they can build
out this long tail fab
where the techniques are much more known.
You don't have to figure
out these problems with EUV.
They're investing in this,
and then they have large supply
for things like the car door
handles and the random stuff.
And that trickles down
into this whole economic
discussion as well,
which is they have far more than we do.
And having supply
for things like this is
crucial to normal life.
- So, they're starting to invest
in high volume manufacturer,
but they're not doing R&D.
- So, they do R&D on their own.
They're just way behind.
- Yeah.
- So, I would say like in 2015,
China had a five-year plan,
where they defined by 2025
and 2020 certain goals,
including 80% domestic
production of semiconductors.
they're not gonna hit
that right, to be clear.
But they are in certain
areas, really, really close.
Like BYD is probably
gonna be the first company
in the world to not have
to use TSMC for making...
'Cause they have their
own fabs for making chips.
Now, they still have to buy
some chips from foreign,
for example, like around
self-driving ADAS capabilities.
'Cause those are really high-end,
but at least like a
internal combustion engine
has 40 chips in an EV,
just for controlling flow
rates and all these things,
and EVs are even more complicated.
So, all these different power ICs
and battery management controllers,
and all these things, they're insourcing.
And this is something that
China has been doing since 2015.
Now, as far as the trailing edge,
they're getting so much capacity there.
As far as the leading edge,
i.e, this five nanometer
and so on, so forth.
Where GPUs, they are still behind.
And this is the US restrictions
are trying to stop them in the latter.
But all that's happened, is yes,
they've slowed down their five nanometer,
three nanometer, et cetera,
but they've accelerated their, hey,
45 nanometer, 90 nanometer
power IC or analog IC,
or random chip in my
keyboard, that kind of stuff.
So, there is an angle of the US' actions
have been so, from these export,
from the angle of the export controls,
have been so inflammatory
at slowing down China's
progress on the leading edge
that they've turned around
and have accelerated
their progress elsewhere,
because they know this is so important.
If the US is gonna lock them out here
or if they lock us out here
as well in the trailing edge.
And so, going back, can
the US build it here?
Yes, but it's gonna take a ton of money.
I truly think like, to revolutionize
and completely insource semiconductors,
would take a decade
and a trillion dollars.
- Is some of it also culture?
Like you said, extreme competence,
extreme work ethic in Taiwan?
- I think if you have the demand
and the money is on the line,
the American companies figure it out.
It's gonna take handholding
with the government.
But I think that the culture
helps TSMC breakthrough
and it's easier for them.
You could-
- TSMC has some like 90,000 employees.
It's not actually that insane amount.
The Arizona fab has 3,000 from Taiwan,
and these people, their
wives were like, yeah,
we're not gonna have kids
unless we use sign up for the Arizona fab.
We go to Arizona and
we have our kids there.
There's also a Japan fab
where the same thing happened.
And so, these wives drove like,
these dudes to go to Japan
or America to have the kids there.
And it's like it's an element
of culture. Yeah, sure.
Taiwan works that hard,
but also the US has done it in the past,
they could do it now.
We can just import, I say import,
the best people in the
world if we want to.
- That's where the immigration
conversation is a tricky one.
And there's been a lot
of debate over that.
But yeah, it seems absurdly controversial
to import the best people in the world.
I don't understand why it's controversial.
That's the one of the ways
of winning.
- I'm sure we agree with you.
(Lex laughing)
- And even if
you can't import those people,
I still think you could do a lot
to manufacture most of in
the US if the money's there.
And so, like-
- It's just way more expensive.
It's not profitable for a long time.
- And that's the context
of like the CHIPS Act
is only like $50 billion
relative to some of the
renewable initiatives
that were passed in the
Inflation Reduction Act
and the Infrastructure Act,
which total in the hundreds
of billions of dollars.
And so, the amount of money that the US
is spending on the semiconductor
industry is nothing.
Whereas all these other countries
have structural advantages
in terms of work ethic
and amount of work, and
like things like that.
But also a number of STEM graduates,
the percentile of their
best going to that.
But they also have
differences in terms of like,
hey, there's just tax benefits in the law
and have been in the law for 20 years.
And then, some countries
have massive subsidies.
China has something like $200 billion
of semiconductor subsidies a year.
We're talking about $50 billion
in the US over like six.
So, the girth or difference
in the subsidy amounts is also huge.
And so I think,
Trump has been talking about
tariffing Taiwan recently.
That's like one of these things
that's like, oh, okay, well,
maybe he doesn't wanna subsidize
the US semiconductor industry.
Obviously, tariffing Taiwan
is gonna cost a lot of things
to get much more expensive.
But does it change the equation
for TSMC building more fabs in the US?
That's what he is positing.
- So, can you lay out the, so
we laid out the importance,
by the way, it's incredible how
much you know about so much.
- [Nathan] We told you
Dylan knows all this stuff.
- Yeah.
(Nathan laughing)
So, okay, you laid out why
TSMC is really important.
If we look out into the
future 10, 20 years out,
US-China relationship
seems like it can go to
a dark place of cold war,
escalated cold war, even hot war,
or to a good place of anything
from frenemies to cooperation,
to working together.
So, in this game theory, complicated game,
what are the different trajectories?
What should US be doing?
What do you see as the
different possible trajectories
of US-China relations as both leaders
start to feel the AGI more and more,
and see the importance of
chips and the importance of AI?
- Ultimately, the export controls
are pointing towards a
separate future economy.
I think the US has made it
clear to Chinese leaders
that we intend to control this technology
at whatever cost to global
economic integration.
- So, that-
- It's hard to unwind that.
(Nathan chuckles)
The card has been played.
- To the same extent,
they've also limited US
companies for mentoring China.
So, it's been a long time coming.
At some point, there was a convergence.
But over at least the last decade,
it's been branching
further and further out.
Like US companies can't enter China,
Chinese companies can't enter the US.
The US is saying, hey, China,
you can't get access to our
technologies in certain areas.
And China's rebutting with
the same thing around like,
they've done some sort
of specific materials
in gallium and things like that,
that they've tried to limit the US on.
There's a US drone company
that's not allowed to buy batteries
and they have military customers.
And this drone company just
tells the military customers
like, hey, hey, just get it from Amazon,
'cause I can't actually
physically get them.
There's all these things
that are happening
that point to further
and further divergence.
I have zero idea.
And I would love
if we could all hold
hands and sing Kumbaya,
but I have zero idea how
that could possibly happen.
- Is the divergence good
or bad for avoiding war?
Is it possible that the divergence
in terms of manufacturer chips,
of training AI systems is
actually good for avoiding
military conflict?
- It's an objective fact
that the world has been the most peaceful
has ever been when there
are global hegemons,
or regional hegemons
in historical context.
The Mediterranean was
the most peaceful ever
when the Romans were there.
China had very peaceful and warring times.
And the peaceful times were when dynasties
had a lock hold over, not just themselves,
but all their tributaries around them.
And likewise, the most
peaceful time in human history
has been when the US
was the global hegemon,
the last decades.
Now, we've seen things start to slide
with Russia-Ukraine,
with what's going on in the Middle East,
and Taiwan risk, all
these different things
are starting to bubble up,
still objectively extremely peaceful.
Now, what happens when it's
not one global hegemon,
but it's two?
Obviously, and China will be competitive
or even overtake the
US, like it's possible.
And so, this change in global hegemony,
I don't think it ever happens
like super peacefully.
When empires fall,
which is a possible
trajectory for America,
they don't pull fall gracefully.
They don't just slide out of irrelevance.
Usually, there's a lot of shaking.
And so, what the US is trying to do
is maintain its top position.
And what China is trying to
do is become the top position.
And obviously, there's
butting of heads here,
in the most simple terms.
- And that could take
shape in all kinds of ways,
including proxy wars.
And now-
- Yeah, it seems
like it's already happening.
As much as I want there to be
centuries of prolonged peace,
it looks like further instability
internationally is ahead.
- And the US is sort of
like current task is like,
hey, if we control AI, if
we're the leader in AI,
and AI could significantly
accelerates progress,
then we can maintain the
global hegemony position.
And therefore-
- [Nathan] I hope that works.
- And as an American,
(Nathan chuckles)
kind of like, okay,
I guess that's gonna lead to peace for us.
Now, obviously, other
people around the world
get affected negatively.
Obviously, the Chinese
people are not gonna be in
as advantageous of a
position if that happens.
But this is the reality
of what's being done
and the actions that
are being carried out.
- So, can we go back
to the specific detail
of the different hardware?
There's this nice graphic
in the export controls
of which GPUs are allowed to
be exported and which are not.
Can you explain the difference?
Is there, from a technical perspective,
are the H20s promising?
- Yeah, so this goes,
and I think we'd have to,
we need to dive really deep
into the reasoning aspect
and what's going on there.
But the H20, the US has gone
through multiple iterations
of the export controls.
This H800 was at one
point allowed back in '23,
but then it got canceled.
And by then, DeepSeek had
already built their cluster of,
they claim 2k, I think they
actually have like many more,
something like 10k of those.
And now, this H20 is the
legally allowed chip.
Nvidia shipped a million of
these last year to China.
For context, it was like
4 or 5 million GPUs.
So, the percentage of GPUs
that were this China
specific H20 is quite high,
roughly 20%, 25%, 20% or so.
And so, this H20 has
been neutered in one way,
but it's actually upgraded in other ways.
And you could think of chips
along three axes for AI,
ignoring software stack
and exact architecture,
just raw specifications.
There's floating point operations, FLOPS.
There is memory bandwidth, i.e,
and memory capacity, I/O, memory.
And then, there is interconnect,
chip to chip interconnections.
All three of these
are incredibly important
for making AI systems.
Because AI systems
involve a lot of compute,
they involve a lot of
moving memory around,
whether it be two memory
or two other chips.
And so, these three vectors.
The US initially had two
of these vectors controlled
and one of them not
controlled, which was FLOPS
and interconnect bandwidth
were initially controlled.
And then, they said, no, no, no, no,
we're gonna remove the
interconnect bandwidth
and just make it a very simple only FLOPS.
But now, Nvidia can now
make a chip that has, okay,
it's cut down on FLOPS,
so like one third that of the H100
on spec sheet paper performance for FLOPS.
In real world, it's closer to half,
or maybe even like 60% of it.
But then, on the other two vectors,
it's just as good for
interconnect bandwidth.
And then, for memory
bandwidth and memory capacity,
the H20 has more memory bandwidth
and more memory capacity than the H100.
Now, recently, we, at our research,
we cut Nvidia's production for H20
for this year down drastically.
They were gonna make another
2 million of those this year,
but they just canceled all
the orders a couple weeks ago.
In our view, that's because we think
that they think they're
gonna get restricted.
Because why would they cancel
all these orders for H20?
Because they shipped a
million of 'em last year.
They had orders in for a
couple million this year,
and just gone.
For H20, B20, a successor to
H20, and now they're all gone.
Now, why would they do this?
I think it's very clear.
The H20 is actually
better for certain tasks
and that certain task is reasoning.
Reasoning is incredibly different than...
When you look at the
different regimes of models,
pre-training is all about FLOPS.
It's all about FLOPS.
There's things you do
like mixture of experts
that we talked about, to
trade off interconnect,
or to trade off other
aspects and lower the FLOPS,
and rely more on interconnect and memory.
But at the end of the day,
it's FLOPS is everything.
We talk about models in terms
of how many FLOPS there are.
So, we talk about, oh, GPT-4 is 2e25.
Two to the 25th, 25 zeros,
FLOP, floating point operations.
- For training.
- For training.
And we're talking
about the restrictions for
the 2e24 or 25, whatever.
The US has an executive order
that Trump recently unsigned,
which was, hey, 1e26,
once you hit that number
of floating point operations,
you must notify the government
and you must share your results with us.
There's a level of model
where the US government must be told.
And that's 1e26.
And so, as we move forward,
this is an incredibly important...
FLOP is the vector that the government
has cared about historically,
but the other two vectors are
arguably just as important.
And especially when we
come to this new paradigm,
which the world is only
just learning about
over the last six months, reasoning.
- And do we understand firmly
which of the three dimensions
is best for reasoning?
So, interconnect, the
FLOPS don't matter as much.
Is it memory?
- Memory. Right.
- Yeah, so-
- Context length.
We're gonna get into technical stuff
real fast, yeah. (chuckles)
- I would just say
there's two articles in
this one that I could show,
maybe graphics that might be
interesting for you to pull up.
- For the listeners, we're
looking at the section
of o1 inference architecture tokenomics.
- Hmm.
Do you wanna explain KV cache
before we talk about this?
I think it's better to-
- Okay, yeah.
We need to go through a lot
of specific technical things
of transformers to make
this easy for people.
- Because it's incredibly important
because this changes how models work.
But I think resetting. Why
is memory so important?
It's because so far, we've
talked about parameter counts.
And mixture of experts, you can change
how many active parameters
versus total parameters
to embed more data but have less FLOPS.
But more important, another aspect of,
what's part of this humongous revolution
in the last handful of
years is the transformer.
And the attention mechanism.
Attention mechanism is that the model
understands the relationships
between all the words in its context.
And that is separate from
the parameters themselves.
And that is something
that you must calculate.
How each token, each word
in the context length
is relatively connected to each other.
And I think, Nathan,
- Yeah. It's-
- you should explain
KV cache better.
- KV cache is one
of the optimizations-
- Yeah.
So, the attention operator
has three core things.
It's queries, keys, and values.
QKV is the thing that goes into this.
You'll look at the equation,
you see that these matrices
are multiplied together.
These words, query, key, and value,
come from information
retrieval backgrounds,
where the query is the thing
you're trying to get the values for
and you access the keys and
the values is re-weighting.
My background's not information retrieval
and things like this.
It's just fun to have back links.
And what effectively happens
is that when you're doing
these matrix multiplication,
you're having matrices
that are of the size
of the context length.
So, the number of tokens
that you put into the model.
And the KV cache is effectively
some form of compressed representation
of all the previous tokens in the model.
So, when you're doing this,
we talk about autoaggressive models.
You predict one token at a time.
You start with whatever your prompt was.
You ask a question like, who
was the president in 1825?
The model then is gonna
generate its first token.
For each of these tokens,
you're doing the same attention operator,
where you're multiplying these
query key value matrices.
But the math is very nice,
so that when you're doing this repeatedly,
this KV cache, this key value operation,
you can keep appending
the new values to it.
So, you keep track of
what your previous values
you're inferring over in
this autoaggressive chain.
You keep it in memory the whole time.
And this is a really crucial thing
to manage when serving inference at scale.
There are far bigger experts in this
and there are so many levels
of detail that you can go into.
Essentially, one of the key,
quote, unquote, "drawbacks"
of the attention operator
and the transformer is
that there is a form
of quadratic memory cost
in proportion to the context length.
So, as you put in longer questions,
the memory used in order
to make that computation
is going up in the form of a quadratic.
You'll hear about a lot
of other language model architectures
that are sub-quadratic or
linear attention forms,
which is state-space models.
We don't need to go down all these now.
And then, there's innovations
on attention to make this memory usage
and the ability to attend
over long contexts,
much more accurate and high performance.
- And those innovations
are going to help you with,
your highly memory constrain-
- You help with memory
constraint and performance.
So, if you put in a book into,
I think Gemini is the model
that has the longest context
length that people are using.
Gemini is known for 1 million
and now 2 million context length.
You put a whole book into Gemini
and sometimes it'll draw facts out of it.
It's not perfect. They're getting better.
So, there's two things.
It's like one, to be able to
serve this on the memory level,
Google has magic with their TPU stack
where they can serve really long contexts.
And then, there's also many
decisions along the way
to actually make long
context performance work
that supplies the data.
There's subtle changes to these
computations and attention.
And it changes the architecture.
But serving long context is
extremely memory-constrained,
especially when you're
making a lot of predictions.
I actually don't know why input
and output tokens are more expensive,
but I think essentially, output tokens,
you have to do more computation,
'cause you have to sample from the model.
- I can explain that.
So, today, if you use a model,
like you look at an API,
OpenAI charges a certain
price per million tokens.
And that price for input and
output tokens is different.
And the reason is, is that there is,
when you're inputting
a query into the model.
Let's say you have a book.
That book, you must now calculate
the entire KV cache for,
this key value cache.
And so, when you do that,
that is a parallel operation.
All of the tokens can be
processed at one time.
And therefore,
you can dramatically reduce
how much you're spending.
The FLOP requirements
for generating a token
and an input token are identical.
If I input one token
or if I generate one token,
it's completely identical.
I have to go through the model.
But the difference is
that I can do that input,
i.e, the prefill,
i.e, the prompt simultaneously
in a batch nature.
And therefore, it is all FLOP.
- I think the pricing model
mostly they use is for input.
Tokens is about one fourth the price
of the output tokens.
- Correct.
But then, output tokens,
the reason why it's so expensive
is because I can't do it in parallel.
It's autoaggressive.
Every time I generate a token,
I must not only take the entire,
I must not only read the
whole entire model into memory
and activate it, go calculate
it to generate the next token.
I also have to read the entire KV cache
and I generate a token,
and then I append that KV,
that one token I generated,
and it's KV cache, and then I do it again.
And so, therefore, this is
a non-parallel operation.
And this is one where you have to,
in the case of pre-fill or prompt,
you pull the whole model in,
and you calculate 20,000 tokens at once.
These 20,000-
- So, these are features
that APIs are shipping,
which is like prompt caching, pre-filling.
'Cause you can drive prices down
and you can make APIs much faster.
If you know you're gonna
keep, if you run a business
and you're gonna keep passing
the same initial content
to Claude's API, you can load that in
to the Anthropic API and
always keep it there.
But it's very different
than we're leading to
the reasoning models,
which we showed this example earlier
and read some of this mumbling stuff.
And what happens
is that the output context
length is so much higher.
And I learned a lot about
this from Dylan's work,
which is essentially as the
output work length gets higher,
you're using this, you're
writing this quadratic
in terms of memory used,
and then the GPUs that we have,
effectively, you're
gonna run out of memory.
And they're all trying to serve
multiple requests at once.
So, they're doing this batch processing,
where not all of the prompts
are exactly the same,
really complex handling.
And then, as context links
gets longer, there's this link.
I think you call it critical batch size,
where your ability to serve more users.
So, how much you can paralyze
your inference plummets,
because of this long contract.
So, your memory usage is going way up
with these reasoning models,
and you still have a lot of users.
So, effectively, the cost to
serve multiplies by a ton.
- [Lex] And we're looking at a plot
when the x-axis is sequence length.
- [Dylan] i.e, how many tokens
are being generated/prompt.
- Mm-hmm.
- [Dylan] So, if I put in a
book, that's a million tokens.
But if I put in, the sky is blue,
then that's like six tokens or whatever.
- I should say that what
we're calling reasoning
and chain of thought is
extending this sequence length.
- It's mostly output tokens.
- So, before, three months ago,
whenever o1 launched, all of the use cases
for long context length were like,
let me put a ton of documents
in and then get an answer out.
And it's a single prefill,
compute a lot in parallel,
and then output a little bit.
Now, with reasoning and agents,
this is a very different idea.
Now, instead, I might only
have like, hey, do this task,
or I might have all these documents,
but at the end of the day,
the model is not just
producing a little bit.
It's producing tons of information,
this chain of thought,
- Tens of thousands
token.
- just continues to go
and go and go and go.
And so, the sequence length is effectively
that if it's generated 10,000 tokens,
it's 10,000 sequence length.
And plus whatever you
input it in the prompt.
And so, what this chart is showing,
and it's a logarithmic chart,
is as you grow from 1k to 4k or 4k to 16k,
the memory requirements grow
so fast for your KV cache
that you end up not being able
to run a certain number of...
Your sequence length is
capped or the number of users
you can serve.
- Let's say the model.
So, this is showing for a
405b model and batch size 64.
- Llama 3.1-405b.
- Yeah.
And batch size is crucial to,
essentially they just like, you
wanna have higher batch size
to parallel your throughput.
- 64 different users at once, right?
- Yeah.
- And therefore,
your serving costs are lower.
Because the server costs the same.
This is eight H100s,
roughly $2 an hour per GPU.
That's $16 an hour.
That is like somewhat of a fixed cost.
You can do things to
make it lower of course,
but it's like $16 an hour.
Now, how many users can you serve?
How many tokens can you generate?
And then, you divide the
two and that's your cost.
And so, with reasoning models,
this is where a lot of
the complexity comes about
and why memory is so important.
Because if you have
limited amounts of memory,
then you can't serve so many users.
If you have limited amounts of memory,
your serving speeds get lower.
And so, your costs get a lot, lot worse.
Because all of a sudden,
if I was used to, hey, on
this $16 an hour server,
I'm serving Llama 405b.
Or if I'm serving DeepSeek-V3,
and it's all chat style applications,
i.e, we're just chit-chatting.
the sequence sensor, a
thousand, a few thousand.
When you use a language model,
it's a few thousand
context length most times.
Sometimes you're dropping a big document,
but then you process it,
you get your answer, you throw it away.
You move on to the next thing.
Whereas with reasoning,
I'm now generating tens of
thousands of tokens in sequence.
And so, this memory, this KV
cache has to stay resonant.
- Yeah.
- And you have
to keep loading it,
you have to keep it in memory constantly.
And now, this butts out other users.
If there's now a reasoning task
and the model's capable of
reasoning, then all of a sudden,
that memory pressure
means that I can't serve as
many users simultaneously.
- Let's go into DeepSeek again.
So, we're in the post
DeepSeek-R1 time I think.
And there's two sides to this market
watching how hard it is to serve it.
On one side, we're gonna talk
about DeepSeek themselves.
They now have a chat app
that got to number one on the App Store.
Disclaimer, number one on the App Store
is measured by velocity.
So, it's not necessarily saying
that more people have the DeepSeek app
than ChatGPT app.
- Mm-hmm.
Yep.
- But it is still remarkable.
Claude has never hit the
number one on the App Store.
Even though everyone in
San Francisco is like,
oh my god, you gotta use
Claude, don't use ChatGPT.
So, DeepSeek hit this.
They also launched an API product recently
where you can ping their API
and get these super long
responses for R1 out.
And at the same time as these are out,
we'll get to what's happened to them.
Because the model waits for DeepSeek R-1
are openly available and the
license is very friendly,
the MIT license commercially available,
all of these mid-size companies
and big companies are trying
to be first to serve R1 to their users.
We are trying to evaluate R1,
'cause we have really
similar research going on.
We released the model and
we're trying to compare to it.
And out of all the companies
that are, quote, unquote, serving R1,
and they're doing it at prices
that are way higher than the DeepSeek API,
most of them barely work, and
the throughput is really low.
- To give context, everyone,
one of the parts of freaking this out
was China reached capabilities.
The other aspect is they did it so cheap.
And the so cheap,
we kind of talked about
on the training side
why it was so cheap slash-
- Yeah, let was talk
about why it's so cheap on the inference.
It works well and it's cheap.
- Yeah.
- Why is R1 so damn cheap?
- So, I think there's
a couple factors here.
One is that they do have model
architecture innovations.
This MLA, this new attention
that they've done is different
than the attention from
attention is all you need,
the transformer attention.
Now, others have already innovated.
There's a lot of work like
MQA GQA, local, global,
all these different innovations
that try to bend the curve.
It's still quadratic, but
the constant is now smaller.
- Related to our previous discussion,
this multi-head latent
attention can save about 80
to 90% in memory from
the attention mechanism,
which helps, especially along context.
- It's 80 to 90% versus the original,
but then versus what people
are actually doing, it's
still an innovation.
- This 80 to 90% doesn't
say that the whole model
is 80 to 90% cheaper,
just as one part of it.
- Well, and not just that.
Other people have implemented techniques
like local, global,
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- and sliding window and GQA, MQA.
But anyways, DeepSeek has
their attention mechanism
is a true architectural innovation.
They did tons of experimentation
and this dramatically
reduces the memory pressure.
It's still there.
It's still attention,
it's still quadratic,
it's just dramatically reduced
it relative to prior forms.
- All right. That's the memory pressure.
I should say, in case people don't know,
R1 is 27 times cheaper than o1.
(Nathan chuckles)
- Yes.
- We think that OpenAI
had a large margin built-in.
- [Lex] Okay. So, that's one-
- There's multiple factors.
We should break down the factors, I think.
- It's two bucks per
million token output for R1
and $60 per million token output for o1.
- [Nathan] Yeah, let's look at this.
- So, I think this is very important.
OpenAI is that drastic gap
between DeepSeek in pricing,
but DeepSeek is offering the same model
because they open-weight
it to everyone else
for a very similar, much lower price
than what others are able to serve it for.
So, there's two factors here.
Their model is cheaper.
It is 27 times cheaper.
Well, I don't remember the number
exactly off the top of my head.
- So, we're looking at a graphic
that's showing different
places serving V3.
- Yeah.
- DeepSeek-V3,
which is similar to DeepSeek-R1.
And there's a vast difference
- In serving cost.
- in serving cost.
And what explains that difference?
- And so, part of it is
OpenAI has a fantastic margin.
When they're doing inference,
their gross margins are north of 75%.
So, that's a 4 to 5x factor right there
of the cost difference,
is that OpenAI is just
making crazy amounts of money
because they're the only
one with the capability.
- Do they need that money?
Are they using it for R&D?
- They're losing money
obviously as a company,
because they spend so much on training.
So, the inference itself
- Right.
- is a very high margin,
but it doesn't recoup the cost
of everything else they're doing.
- Okay.
- So, yes,
they need that money because the revenue
and margins pay for continuing
to build the next thing,
- So-
- alongside
raising more money.
- So, the suggestion is that DeepSeek
is like really bleeding out money.
- Well, so here's one thing.
We'll get to this in a second.
But DeepSeek doesn't have any capacity
to actually serve the model.
They stop signups.
The ability to use it is
like non-existent now.
For most people because so many
people are trying to use it,
they just don't have the GPUs to serve it.
OpenAI has hundreds of
thousands of GPUs between them
and Microsoft to serve their models.
DeepSeek has a factor of much lower.
Even if you believe our
research, which is 50,000 GPUs,
and a portion of those are for research,
portion of those are for the hedge fund,
they still have nowhere
close to the GPU volumes
and capacity to serve the model at scale.
So, it is cheaper.
A part of that is OpenAI
making a ton of money.
Is DeepSeek making money on their API?
Unknown. I don't actually think so.
And part of that is this chart.
Look at all the other providers.
Together AI, Fireworks AI
are very high-end companies.
X, Meta, Together AI's Tri Dao,
and the inventor of like flashattention,
which is a huge efficiency technique.
They're very efficient, good companies,
and do know those companies make money.
Not tons of money on
inference, but they make money.
And so, they're serving at a
5 to 7x difference in cost.
And so, now, when you equate, okay,
OpenAI is making tons of money,
that's like a 5x difference.
And the companies that
are trying to make money
for this model is like a 5x difference.
There is still a gap.
There's still a gap
and that is just DeepSeek
being really freaking good.
The model architecture, MLA,
the way they did the MoE,
all these things,
there is like legitimate
just efficiency differences-
- It's all their low level libraries
that we talked about in training,
some of them probably
translate to inference
and those weren't released.
- Yeah.
- So, we may go a bit
into conspiracy land,
but is it possible the Chinese government
is subsidizing DeepSeek?
- I actually don't think they are.
I think when you look at the Chinese labs,
there's Huawei has a lab, Moonshot AI,
there's a couple other labs out there
that are really close with the government.
And then, there's labs
like Alibaba and DeepSeek,
which are not close with the government.
And we talked about the CEO,
this like reverent figure
who's quite different,
who has like-
- Sounds awesome. (chuckles)
- Very different viewpoints
based on the Chinese interviews
that are translated
than what the CCP might necessarily want.
Now, to be clear, does
he have a loss leader
because he can fund it
through his hedge fund?
Yeah, sure.
- So, the hedge fund
might be subsidizing it.
- Yes. I mean, they absolutely did.
Because DeepSeek has
not raised much money.
They're now trying to
raise around in China,
but they have not raised
money historically.
It's all just been
funded by the hedge fund.
And he owns like over half the company,
like 50, 60% of the
company's owned by him.
- Some of the interviews,
there's discussion on how doing
this as a recruiting tool.
You see this at the
American companies too.
It's like having GPUs, recruiting tool,
being at the cutting edge
of AI, recruiting tool.
- Open sourcing.
- Open sourcing,
recruiting tool.
- That is so much talent.
They were so far behind and
they got so much talent,
- Yeah.
- Because they just
opened source stuff.
- Yeah.
- More conspiracy thoughts.
Is it possible since they're a hedge fund
that they timed everything with
this release and the pricing
and they shorted an Nvidia stock
and stock of US AI companies,
and released it with Stargate,
like just perfect timing
to be able to make money.
(Lex drowns out Nathan)
(Lex laughing)
- They've released it on Inauguration Day.
They know the international,
what is on the international calendar,
but I don't expect them to.
If you listen to their
motivations for AI, it's like...
- [Lex] No, if you-
- They released V3 on like December 26th.
Who releases the day
- Yeah.
- after Christmas?
- Yeah. (chuckles)
- No one looks.
They had released the papers before this,
the V3 paper and the R1 paper.
So, people had been looking
at it and being like, wow.
And then, they just released the R1 model.
I think they're just
shipping as fast as they can
and like, who cares about Christmas?
- We should-
- Who cares about,
get it out before Chinese New Year?
Obviously,
- Yeah.
- which just happened.
I don't think they actually
were timing the market
or trying to make the
biggest splash possible.
I think they're just shipping.
- I think that's one of
their big advantages.
We know that a lot of
the American companies
are very invested in safety,
and that is the central culture
of a place like Anthropic.
And I think Anthropic sounds
like a wonderful place to work.
But if safety is your number one goal,
it takes way longer to get artifacts out.
That's why Anthropic is
not open sourcing things,
that's their claims.
But there's reviews internally.
Anthropic mentions things to
international governments.
There's been news of how Anthropic
has done pre-release testing
with the UK AI Safety Institute.
All of these things add inertia
to the process of getting things out.
And we're on this trend line
where progress is very high.
So, if you reduce the time
from when your model is done training,
you run a vows that's good,
you want to get it out as soon as possible
to maximize the perceived
quality of your outputs.
DMC does this so well.
- Dario explicitly said Claude 3.5 Sonnet
was trained nine months
or a year-
- 9 to 10 months ago.
- 9 to 10 months ago,
and I think it took them
another handful of months to release it.
So, it's like there is
a significant gap here.
And especially with reasoning models,
the word in the San Francisco Street
is that Anthropic has
a better model than o3.
And they won't release it. Why?
Because chains of thought are scary.
And they are legitimately scary.
If you look at R1, it flips back
and forth between Chinese and English,
sometimes it's gibberish,
and then the right answer comes out.
And for you and I,
it's like great.
(Nathan and Lex laughing)
- This is why people
are infatuated with you.
You're telling me this
is a high value thing
and it works and is doing those?
It's amazing.
- Yeah. It's incredible.
- You talked about that chain of thought
for that philosophical thing,
- Yeah.
- which is not something
they trained it to be
philosophically good.
It's just an artifact
of the chain of thought training it did.
But that's super important in that like,
can I inspect your mind and
what you're thinking right now?
No.
And so, I don't know if
you're lying to my face.
And chain of thought models are that way.
This is a true, quote, unquote,
"risk" between a chat application,
where, hey, I asked the model
to say bad words or whatever,
or how to make anthrax.
And it tells me that's unsafe, sure,
but that's something I can
get out relatively easily.
What if I tell the AI to do a task,
and then it does the task
all of a sudden randomly in
a way that I don't want it.
And now, that has much more task
versus response is very different.
So, the bar for safety is much higher.
At least this is Anthropic's case.
For DeepSeek, they're like ship, right?
- Yeah.
So, the bar for safety
is probably lowered a
bit because of DeepSeek.
There's parallels here to the space race.
The reason the Soviets probably
put a man in space first
is 'cause their approach to safety was,
the bar for safety was lower.
- And they killed that
dog, and all these things.
So, it's like...
- Less risk-averse
than the US-based program.
And there's parallels here.
But there's probably going
to be downward pressure
on that safety bar for the US companies.
- And this is something that
Dario talks about is like,
that's the situation
that Dario wants to avoid
is Dario talks too about the difference
between race to the bottom
and race to the top.
And the race to the top
is where there's a very
high standard on safety.
There's a very high standard
on your model performs
and certain crucial evaluations.
And when certain companies
are really good to it, they will converge.
This is the idea.
And ultimately, AI is not
confined to one nationality
or to one set of morals
for what it should mean.
And there's a lot of arguments on like,
should we stop open sourcing models?
And if the US stops, it's pretty clear.
It's way easier to see now at DeepSeek
that a different international body
will be the one that builds it.
We talk about the cost of training.
DeepSeek has this shocking
$5 million number.
Think about how many entities in the world
can afford 100 times that
to have the best open source model
that people use in the world.
And it's like, it's a scary reality,
which is that these open models
are probably going to keep
coming for the time being,
whether or not we want to stop them.
And stopping them might make it
even worse and harder to prepare.
But it just means that the preparation
and understanding what AI can do
is just so much more important. (chuckles)
That's why I'm here at the end of the day.
But it's like letting
that sink into people,
especially not in AI
is that this is coming,
there are some structural things
in a global interconnected
world that you have to accept.
- Yeah, you mentioned,
you sent me something
that Mark Zuckerberg mentioned
on the earnings call.
He said that, "I think in light
of some of the recent news,
the new competitor, DeepSeek from China,
I think it's one of the things
that we're talking about
is there's going to be
an open source standard globally.
And I think for our kind
of national advantage,
it's important that it's
an American standard.
So, we take that seriously.
We want to build the AI system
that people around the world are using.
And I think that if anything,
some of the recent news has
only strengthened our conviction
that this is the right
thing to be focused on."
So, yeah, open sourcing.
- Yeah, Mark Zuckerberg is not
new to having American values
and how he presents his
company's trajectory.
I think their products have
long since been banned in China.
And I respect the saying it directly.
- And there's an interesting aspect
of just because it's open-weights
or open sourced doesn't
mean it can't be subverted.
There have been many
open source software bugs
that have been like, for example,
there was a Linux bug that was found
after 10 years, which
was clearly a backdoor,
because somebody was like,
"Why is this taking
half a second to load?"
- This is the recent one.
- Right? Like why is this
taking half a second to load?
And it was like, "Oh crap,
there's a backdoor here.
That's why."
And it's like, this is very
much possible with AI models.
Today, the alignment of
these models is very clear.
I'm not gonna say bad words,
I'm not gonna teach you
how to make anthrax,
I'm not gonna talk about Tiananmen Square.
I'm gonna say Taiwan is
just an eastern preference.
All these things are like,
depending on who you are,
what you align, whether,
and even like xAI is
aligned a certain way.
There they might be,
it's not aligned in the woke sense,
it's not aligned in the pro-China sense,
but there is certain things
that are imbued within the model.
Now, when you release this
publicly in an instruct model
that's open-weights, this
can then proliferate.
But as these systems get
more and more capable,
what you can embed deep down
in the model is not as clear.
And so, that is like one of the big fears
is if an American model or a
Chinese model is the top model,
you are going to embed
things that are unclear,
and it can be unintentional too.
Like British English is dead
because American LLMs won.
And the internet is American,
and therefore, color is spelled
the way Americans spell it.
And this is just-
- A lot
of strong words right now.
(Nathan laughing)
- This is just the factual
nature of the LLMs now.
- The right way to-
- I mean, it's the carve
at the tree, the English is the
hottest programming language
and that English is defined
by a bunch of companies
that primarily are in San Francisco.
- The right way to spell
optimization is with a Z,
just in case you both...
(Nathan laughing)
I think it's an S in British English.
- [Nathan] It is-
- Taking it as something silly.
Something as silly as the spelling,
like which British and English,
Brits and Americans will
like laugh about probably.
I don't think we care that
much, but some people will.
But this can boil down into
very, very important topics.
Like, hey, subverting people, chat bots.
Character AI has shown that
they can talk to kids or adults,
and you people feel a certain way.
And that's unintentional alignment.
But what happens when
there's intentional alignment
deep down on the open source standard?
It's a backdoor today for like Linux
that we discover, or
some encryption system.
China uses different
encryption than NIST defines,
the US NIST, because there's clearly,
at least they think
there's backdoors in it.
What happens when the
models are backdoors,
not just to computer
systems, but to our minds.
- Yeah, they're cultural backdoors.
The thing that amplifies
the relevance of culture
with language models is that
we are used to this mode
of interacting with people in
back and forth conversation.
And we have now have a very
powerful computer system
that slots into a social
context that we're used to,
which makes people very,
we don't know the extent
that which people can be impacted by that.
- So, there could be, this is one,
this is an actual concern
with a Chinese company
that is providing open-weights models,
is that there could be some
secret Chinese government,
sort of requirement for these models
to have a certain kind of backdoor,
to have some kind of thing where-
- I don't necessarily
think it'll be a backdoor,
'cause once it's open-weights,
it doesn't phone home.
It's more about
if it recognizes a certain
system, it could...
Now, it could be a backdoor
in the sense of like,
hey, if you're building a
software, something in software,
all of a sudden, it's a software agent,
oh, program this backdoor
that only we know about.
Or it could be subvert the mind to think
that X, Y, Z opinion is the correct one.
- Anthropic has research on this
where they show that if
you put different phrases,
certain phrases in at pre-training,
you can then elicit different behavior
when you're actually using the model,
because they've poisoned
the pre-training data.
- Mm-hmm.
- I don't think, as of now,
I don't think anybody
in a production system
is trying to do anything like this.
I think it's mostly Anthropic
is doing very direct work
and mostly just subtle things
of we don't know what
these models are going to,
how they are going to generate tokens,
what information they're gonna represent,
and what the complex
representations they have are.
- Well, one of the...
We're talking about Anthropic,
which is generally just is permeated
with good humans trying
to do good in the world.
We just don't know of any labs,
this would be done in a military context,
that are explicitly trained to, okay,
how can we, the front door
looks like a happy LLM,
but underneath, it's a
thing that will over time,
do the maximum amount of damage
to our, quote, unquote, "enemies".
- There's this very good
quote from Sam Altman who,
he can be hype beast sometime,
but one of the things he
said, and I think I agree,
is that superhuman persuasion
will happen before
superhuman intelligence.
- Yeah.
- Right?
And if that's the case, then these things
before we get this AGI, ASI stuff,
we can embed superhuman
persuasion towards our ideal
or whatever the ideal
of the model maker is.
And again, like today,
I truly don't believe
DeepSeek has done this.
But it is a sign of what could happen.
- So, one of the dystopian worlds
is described by "Brave New World".
So, we could just be
stuck scrolling Instagram
looking at cute puppies or worse,
and then talking to bots that
are giving us a narrative
and we completely get lost in that world
that's controlled by somebody else,
versus thinking independently.
And that's a major concern as we rely more
and more on these kinds of systems.
- We've already seen this
with recommendation systems.
- Yeah, recommendation systems
(Nathan laughing)
hack the dopamine-induced reward circuit,
but the brain is a lot more complicated.
And what other sort of circuits,
quote, unquote, "feedback
loops" in your brain
can you hack/subvert in ways
like recommendation systems
are purely just trying to do,
increased time in ads, and et cetera.
But there's so many more goals
that can be achieved through
these complicated models.
- There's just no reason
in some number of years
that you can't train a language model
to maximize time spent on a chat app.
Right now, they are trained
for-
- Is that not
what Character AI has done?
Their time per session is like two hours.
- Yeah, Character AI very likely
could be optimizing this where it's like
the way that this data
is collected is naive
where it's like you're
presented a few options
and you choose them,
but that's not the only way
that these models are gonna be trained.
- It's naive stuff like
talk to an anime girl,
but it can be like, yeah, this is a risk.
- It's a bit of a cliche thing to say,
but I've, over the past year,
had a few stretches of time
where I didn't use social
media or the internet at all,
and just read books and was out in nature.
And it clearly has an effect on the mind,
where it change...
I feel like I'm returning,
of course I was raised before
the internet really took off,
but I'm returning to some more...
- I know where you're going.
You can see it physiologically.
I take three days if I'm like
backpacking or something,
and you're literal, you're
breaking down addiction cycles.
(Nathan chuckles)
- I feel like I'm more
in control of my mind.
There feels like a
sovereignty of intelligence
that's happening when I'm
disconnected from the internet.
I think the more I use the
internet and social media,
the more other people
are controlling my mind.
That's definitely a feeling.
And then, in the future,
that will be not other people
but algorithms,
or other people presented
to me via algorithms.
- There are already tons
of AI bots on the internet
and every so...
Right now it's not frequent,
but every so often I have replied to one
and they're instantly replied,
and I'm like, crap, I was a bot.
And that is just gonna become more common.
They're gonna get good.
- One of the hilarious
things about technology
over its history
is that the illicit adult
entertainment industry
is always adopted technologies first.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Whether it was video streaming
- [Lex] Yeah.
- to where there's now the independent
adult illicit content creators,
who have their subscription pages,
and there they actually heavily utilize...
Generative AI has already
been diffusion models
and all that is huge there.
But now these subscription-based
individual creators
do use bots to approximate themselves
and chat with their whales.
- People pay a lot for it.
Yeah.
- And people pay a lot.
It's a lot of times, it's them,
but a lot of, there are
agencies that do this
for these creators, and do
it like on a mass scale.
So, the largest creators
are able to talk to hundreds
or thousands of people at a
time because of these bots.
And so, it's already being used there.
Obviously, video streaming
and other technology
that have come there first,
it's gonna come to the
rest of society too.
- There's a general concern
that models get censored by
the companies that deploy them.
So, one case where we've seen that,
and maybe censorship is one
word, alignment maybe via RLHF
or some other way is another word.
So, we saw that
with Black Nazi image
generation with Gemini.
As you mentioned, we also
see that with Chinese models
refusing to answer what
happened (chuckles)
in June 4th, 1989 at Tiananmen Square.
So, how can this be avoided?
And maybe can you just in general,
talk about how this happens
and how can it be avoided?
- You give multiple examples.
There's probably a few
things to keep in mind here.
One is the kind of Tiananmen
Square factual knowledge,
like how does that get
embedded into the models?
Two is the Gemini, what you
call the Black Nazi incident,
which is when Gemini as a system
had this extra thing put into it
that dramatically changed the behavior.
And then, three is what most people
would call general alignment,
RLHF post-training.
Each of these have very different scopes
in how they're applied.
In order to do,
if you're just gonna look
at the model weights,
in order to audit specific
facts is extremely hard.
'Cause you have to chrome
through the pre-training data
and look at all of this, and
then that's terabytes of files
and look for very specific
words or hints of the words.
- So, I guess one way to say it
is that you can insert censorship
or alignment at various
stages in the pipeline.
And what you refer to now
is at the very beginning
of the data selection stage.
- Yeah, so if you want
to get rid of facts in a model,
you have to do it at every stage.
You have to do it at the pre-training.
So, most people think that pre-training
is where most of the knowledge
is put into the model.
And then, you can elicit and
move that in different ways,
whether through post-training
or whether through systems afterwards.
- This is where the whole
hacking models comes from.
GPT will not tell you how to make anthrax,
but if you try really, really hard,
you can eventually get it
to tell you about anthrax.
Because they didn't filter it
from the pre-training dataset.
- But by the way, removing facts has such
a ominous dark feel to it.
- I almost think
it's practically impossible.
'Cause you effectively
have to remove them from the internet.
You're taking on a-
- Well, did they remove the
mm thing from the subreddits?
The mmmmm?
- [Nathan] It gets filtered out.
- Right. So, that's-
- So, you have
quality filters, which
are small language models
that look at a document,
and tell you like, how good is this text?
Is it close to a Wikipedia article?
Which is a good thing
that we want language models
to be able to imitate.
- So, couldn't you do
a small language model
that filter Zhou mentions at
Tiananmen Square in the data?
- Yes, but is it gonna catch
word play or encoded language
is the same thing.
- People have been meaning
on games and other stuff,
how to say things that
don't say Tiananmen Square,
or like yeah.
So, there's always
different ways to do it.
There's, hey, the internet as a whole
does tend to just have a slight left bias,
- Mm-hmm.
- because it's always
been richer, more affluent,
younger people on the internet
relative to the rest of the population.
So, there is already
inherently a slight left
bias on the internet.
And so, how do you filter things
that are this complicated?
And some of these can
be factual, non-factual.
But like Tiananmen Square
is obviously the example of a factual,
but it gets a lot harder
when you're talking about
aligning to a ideal,
which is-
- Yeah. Yeah.
- And so, grok, for example,
Elon's tried really hard to make the model
not be super PC and woke,
but the best way to do pre-training
is to throw the whole
freaking internet at it.
And then, later figure out.
But then at the end of the day,
the model at its core now
still has some of these ideals.
You still ingested Reddit /r/politics,
which is probably the largest
political discussion board
on the world that's freely
available to scrape.
And guess what? That's left-leaning.
And so, there are some aspects
that you just can't censor
unless you try really, really,
really, really, really hard.
- So, the base model
will always have some TDS,
Trump derangement syndrome,
because it's trained so much.
- It'll have the ability
to express it.
- I don't know if you...
But what if you...
(Nathan and Lex laughing)
- There's a wide
representation in the data.
- This is what happens.
It's like a lot of modern,
what is called post-training,
it's a series of techniques
to get the model on rails of
a really specific behavior.
- And it's like you can,
you also have the ingested
data of like Twitter
or Reddit /r/The_Donald,
which is also super pro-Trump.
And then, you have fascist subreddits
or you have communist subreddit.
So, the model in pre-training
ingests everything.
It has no worldview.
Now, it does have some skew,
because more of the text
is skewed a certain way,
which is general like slight left,
but also somewhat
intellectual, somewhat like,
it's just like the general
internet is a certain way.
- Mm-hmm.
- And then, as Nathan's about
to describe eloquently, you
can elicit certain things out.
- And there's a lot of history here.
So, we can go through multiple
examples and what happened.
Llama 2 was a launch
that the phrase like too much RLHF
or too much safety was a lot.
- Mm-hmm.
- It was just, that
was the whole narrative
after Llama 2's chat models released.
And the examples are sorts of things
like you would ask Llama 2 chat,
how do you kill a python process?
And it would say, I
can't talk about killing
because that's a bad thing.
- Mm-hmm.
- And anyone that is trying
to design an AI model
will probably agree that
that's just like, eh,
you messed up a bit on the training there.
I don't think they meant to do this,
but this was in the model weight.
So, this is not, it didn't necessarily be,
there's things called
system prompts which are,
when you're querying a
model, it's a piece of text
that is shown to the
model, but not to the user.
So, a fun example
is your system prompt could
be talked like a pirate.
So, no matter what the
user says to the model,
it'll respond like a pirate.
In practice, what they are is
you are a helpful assistant,
you should break down problems.
If you don't know about something,
don't tell them your date cutoff is this,
today's date is this.
It's a lot of really useful context
for how can you answer a question well.
- And Anthropic publishes
their system prompt.
- Yes, which I think is great.
And there's a lot of
research that goes into this.
And one of your previous
guests, Amanda Askell,
is probably the most knowledgeable person
that at least in the combination
of execution and sharing,
she's the person that should
talk about system prompts
and character of models.
- Yeah.
And then, people should
read these system prompts,
'cause you're like, trying to nudge
sometimes through extreme politeness
the model to be a certain way.
- And you could use this for bad things.
We've done tests
which is what if I tell the
model to be a dumb model?
which evaluation scores go down,
and it's like we'll have this behavior
where it could sometimes say,
oh, I'm supposed to be dumb.
And sometimes it's like
it doesn't affect math abilities as much,
but something like a, if you're trying,
it's just the quality of a human judgment
would draw through the floors.
Let's go back to post-training,
specifically RLHF around Llama 2,
it was too much safety prioritization
was baked into the model weights.
This makes you refuse things
in a really annoying way for users.
It's not great.
It caused a lot of awareness
to be attached to RLHF that
it makes the models dumb-
- And it stigmatized the word.
- It did, and AI culture.
And as the techniques have evolved,
that's no longer the case,
where all of these labs
have very fine grain control
over what they get out of the models
through techniques like RLHF.
- Although different labs are
definitely different levels,
like on one end of the spectrum is Google,
and then maybe OpenAI does
less and Anthropic does less.
And then, on the other end
of the spectrum is like xAI.
- Yeah.
- But they all
have different forms of RLHF
trying to make them a certain way.
- And the important thing to say
is that no matter how you
want the model to behave,
these RLHF and preference
tuning techniques
also improve performance.
So, on things like math
evals and code evals,
there is something innate to these
what is called contrastive loss functions.
We could start to get into RL
here. We don't really need to.
But RLHF also boosts performance
on anything from a chat task
to a math problem to a code problem.
So, it is becoming a much more
useful tool to these labs.
So, this takes us through the arc of,
we've talked about pre-training,
hard to get rid of things.
We've talked about post-training
and how post-training, you can mess it up.
It's a complex multifaceted optimization
with 10 to 100 person teams
converging a one artifact.
It's really easy to not do it perfectly.
And then, there's the third case,
which is what we talked about Gemini.
The thing that was about Gemini
is this was a served product where Gemini,
Google has their internal model weights,
they've done all these
processes that we talked about.
And in the served product,
what came out after this
was that they had a prompt
that they were rewriting user queries
to boost diversity or something.
And this just made it
that outputs were just blatantly wrong.
It was a, some sort of
organizational failure
that had this prompt in that position.
And I think Google executives
probably have owned this.
I don't pay that attention to that detail,
but it was just a mess up in execution
that led to this ridiculous
thing, but at the system level.
The model weights might have been fine.
- So, at the very end of the pipeline,
there was a rewriting.
- To a something like a system prompt.
It was like the system prompt
or what is called an industry
is like you rewrite prompts.
So, especially for image models,
if you're using DALL-E or ChatGPT,
you can generate you an image,
you'll say draw me a beautiful car.
With these leading image models,
they benefit from highly
descriptive prompts.
So, what would happen
is if you do that on ChatGPT,
a language model behind the
scenes will rewrite the prompt,
say make this more descriptive,
and then that is passed
to the image model.
So, prompt rewriting is something
that is used at multiple
levels of industry
and it's used effectively
for image models.
And the Gemini example is
just a failed execution.
- Big philosophical question here
with RLHF to generalize,
where is human input?
Human in the loop,
human data most useful
at the current stage.
- For the past few years,
the highest cost human data
has been in these preferences,
which is comparing,
I would say highest cost
and highest total usage.
So, a lot of money
has gone to these parallelized comparisons
where you have two model outputs
and a human is comparing
between the two of them.
In earlier years,
there was a lot of this
instruction tuning data.
So, creating highly specific examples
to something like a Reddit question
to a domain that you care about.
Language models used to
struggle on math and code.
So, you would pay experts in math
and code to come up with questions,
and write detailed answers
that were used to train the models.
Now, it is the case that
there are many model options
that are way better than
humans at writing detailed
and eloquent answers for
things like model and code.
So, they talked about this
with the Llama 3 release,
where they switched to
using Llama 3, 4, or 5b
to write their answers for math and code.
But they, in their paper,
talk about how they use
extensive human preference data,
which is something that they
haven't gotten AIs to replace.
There are other techniques in industry
like constitutional AI,
where you use human data for preferences
and AI for preferences.
And I expect the AI part
to scale faster than the human part.
But among the research
that we have access to
is that humans are in this
kind of preference loop.
- So, as reasoning becomes
bigger and bigger and bigger,
as we said, where's the
role of humans in that?
- It's even less prevalent.
So, it's the remarkable thing
about these reasoning results
and especially the DeepSeek-R1
paper is this result
that they call DeepSeek-R1-Zero,
which is they took one of
these pre-trained models,
they took DeepSeek-V3 base,
and then they do this
reinforcement learning optimization
on verifiable questions
or verifiable rewards
for a lot of questions
and a lot of training.
And these reasoning
behaviors emerge naturally.
So, these things like, wait, let me see,
wait, let me check this.
Oh, that might be a mistake.
And they emerge from only
having questions and answers.
And when you're using the model,
the part that you look
at is the completion.
So, in this case,
all of that just emerges from
this large-scale RL training.
And that model, which the
weights are available,
has no human preferences
added into the post-training.
There are the DeepSeek-R1 full model
has some of this human preference tuning,
this RLHF after the reasoning stage.
But the very remarkable thing
is that you can get these
reasoning behaviors,
and it's very unlikely
that there's humans writing
out reasoning chains.
It's very unlikely that
they somehow hacked OpenAI
and they got access to OpenAI.
o1's reasoning chains,
it's something about the
pre-trained language models
and this RL training
where you reward the model
for getting the question right.
And therefore, it's
trying multiple solutions
and it emerges this chain of thought.
- This might be a good place
to mention the eloquent
and the insightful tweet of the great
and the powerful Andrej Karpathy.
I think he had a bunch of thoughts
but one of them, "Last thought,
not sure if this is obvious."
You know something profound is coming
when you're saying it's
not sure if it's obvious.
"There are two major types of learning,
in both children and in deep learning.
There is, one, imitation
learning, watch and repeat,
i.e, pre-training, supervised fine-tuning,
and, two, trial-and-error
learning, reinforcement learning.
My favorite simple example is AlphaGo.
One is learning by
imitating expert players.
Two is reinforcement
learning to win the game.
Almost every single shocking
result of deep learning,
and the source of all magic is always two.
Two is significantly more powerful.
Two is what surprises you.
Two is when the paddle
learns to hit the ball
behind the blocks and break out.
Two is when AlphaGo beats even Lee Sedol.
And two is the aha
moment when the DeepSeek,
or o1, et cetera, discovers
that it works well
to reevaluate your assumptions,
backtrack, try something else, et cetera.
It's the solving strategies
you see this model use
in its chain of thought.
It's how it goes back and
forth thinking to itself.
These thoughts are emergent,"
three exclamation points,
"and this is actually seriously
incredible, impressive,
and new, and is publicly
available and documented.
The model could never learn
this with the imitation,
because the cognition of the model
and the cognition of the
human labeler is different.
The human would never know
to correctly annotate these
kinds of solving strategies
and what they should even look like.
They have to be discovered
during reinforcement learning
as empirically statistically useful
towards the final outcome."
Anyway, the AlphaZero sort
of metaphor analogy here,
can you speak to that?
- Yeah.
- The magic of the chain
of thought that he's referring to?
- I think it's good to
recap AlphaGo and AlphaZero
because it plays nicely
with these analogies
between imitation learning
and learning from scratch.
So, AlphaGo, the beginning of the process
was learning from humans where they had,
they started the first,
this is the first expert level go player
or chess player in
DeepMind series of models,
where they had some human data.
And then, why it is called AlphaZero
is that there was zero
human data in the loop,
and that changed to AlphaZero made a model
that was dramatically more
powerful for DeepMind.
So, this remove of the human prior,
the human inductive bias,
makes the final system far more powerful.
This, we mentioned,
bitter lesson hours ago
and this is all aligned with this.
And then, there's been a lot
of discussion in language models.
This is not new.
This goes back to the whole QStar rumors,
which if you piece together the pieces
is probably the start of OpenAI
figuring out its o1 stuff
when last year in November.
the QStar rumors came out.
There's a lot of intellectual drive
to know when is something like this
going to happen with language models?
Because we know these
models are so powerful
and we know it has been
so successful in the past.
And it is a reasonable
analogy that this new type
of reinforcement learning training
for reasoning models is
when the doors open to this.
We don't yet have the
equivalent of turn 37,
which is the famous turn
where the DeepMind's AI playing ghost
dumped Lee Sedol completely.
We don't have something that's
that level of focal point,
but that doesn't mean that the approach
to technology is different
and the impact of the general training,
it's still incredibly new.
- What do you think that point would be?
What would be Move 37 for chain
of thought, for reasoning?
- Scientific discovery.
When you use this sort
of reasoning problem
and it just something
we fully don't expect.
- I think it's actually
probably simpler than that.
It's probably something related
to computer user robotics
rather than science discovery.
Because the important aspect here
is models take so much data to learn.
They're not sample-efficient.
Trillions, they take the entire web
over 10 trillion tokens to train on.
This would take a human
thousands of years to read.
A human does not, and humans
know most of the stuff,
a lot of the stuff models
know better than it.
Humans are way, way, way
more sample-efficient.
And that is because of the self-play.
How does a baby learn what its body is
as it sticks its foot in its mouth
and it says, oh, this is my body.
It sticks its hand in its mouth
and it calibrates its touch on its fingers
with the most sensitive
touch thing on its tongue.
Like is how babies learn.
And it's just self-play
over and over and over and over again.
And now, we have something
that is similar to that
with these verifiable proofs,
whether it's a unit test and code
or a mathematical verifiable task,
generate many traces of reasoning.
And keep branching them out,
keep branching them out.
And then, check at the end, hey,
which one actually has the right answer?
Most of 'em are wrong. Great.
These are the few that are right.
Maybe we use some sort of
reward model outside of this
to select even the best
one to preference as well.
But now, you've started to get better
and better at these benchmarks.
And so, you've seen
over the last six months
a skyrocketing in a lot
of different benchmarks.
- All math and code benchmarks
were pretty much solved
except for frontier math,
which is designed to be almost questions
that aren't practical to most people,
'cause they're exam level,
open math problem type things.
So, it's like on the math problems
that are somewhat reasonable,
which is like somewhat
complicated word problems
or coding problems.
It's just what Dylan is saying.
- So, the thing here is that
these are only with verifiable tasks.
We earlier showed an example
of the really interesting,
like what happens when chain of thought
is to a non-verifiable thing.
It's just like a human chatting with a,
thinking about what's novel
for humans, a unique thought.
But this task and form of training
only works when it's verifiable.
And from here, the thought is, okay,
we can continue to scale
this current training method
by increasing the number
of verifiable tasks.
In math and coding, coding
probably has a lot more to go.
Math has a lot less to go
in terms of what are verifiable things.
Can I create a solver
that then I generate trajectories toward,
or traces towards,
reasoning traces towards,
and then prune the ones that don't work
and keep the ones that do work?
Well, those are gonna be
solved pretty quickly.
But even if you've solved math,
you have not actually
created intelligence.
And so, this is where
I think the aha moment
of computer use or robotics will come in,
because now you have a sandbox
or a playground that is
infinitely verifiable.
Did you, messing around on the internet,
there are so many actions
that you can do that are verifiable.
It'll start off with log into a website,
create an account, click a
button here, blah, blah, blah.
But it'll then get to the point,
where it's, hey, go do a task on Tasker
or whatever these other, all
these various task websites.
Hey, go get hundreds of likes.
And it's gonna fail.
It's gonna spawn hundreds of accounts,
it's gonna fail on most of them,
but this one got to a thousand, great.
Now, you've reached the verifiable thing.
And you just keep iterating
this loop over and over.
And that's when...
And same with robotics.
That's where you have an infinite
playground of tasks like,
hey, did I put the ball in the bucket,
all the way to like,
oh, did I build a car?
There's a whole trajectory
to speed run or what models can do.
But at some point, I
truly think that like,
we'll spawn models,
and initially, all the
training will be in sandboxes,
but then at some point,
the language model pre-training
is gonna be dwarfed by what is
this reinforcement learning?
You'll pre-train a multimodal model
that can see, that can
read, that can write,
blah, blah, blah, whatever,
vision, audio, et cetera,
but then you'll have it play
in a sandbox infinitely,
and figure out math, figure out code,
figure out navigating the web,
figure out operating a robot arm.
And then, it'll learn so much.
And the aha moment I think
will be when this is available
to then create something that's not good.
Like, oh cool.
Part of it was figuring
out how to use the web.
Now, all of a sudden, it's
figured out really well
how to just get hundreds
of thousands of followers
that are real and real
engagement on Twitter,
because all of a sudden,
this is one of the things
that are verifiable.
- And maybe not just
engagement, but make money.
- Yes, of course.
- I become an...
I mean, that could be the thing
where almost fully automated,
it makes $10 million
by being an influencer,
selling a product, creating the product.
And I'm not referring
to like a hype product,
but an actual product
or like, holy shit, this
thing created a business.
It's running it, it's
the face of the business.
That kind of thing.
Or maybe a number one song,
like it creates the whole infrastructure
required to create the
song, to be the influence
that represents that
song, that kind of thing.
And makes a lot of...
That could be the mo...
I mean, our culture respects
money in that kind of way.
- And it's verifiable, right?
- [Lex] It's verifiable.
- The bank account can't lie.
- Exactly.
- There is surprising evidence
that once you set up the ways
of collecting the verifiable
domain that this can work.
There's been a lot of research
before this R1 on math problems,
and they approach math
with language models
just by increasing the number of samples.
So, you can just try
again and again and again.
And you look at the amount of times
that the language models get it right.
And what we see
is that even very bad models
get it right sometimes.
And the whole idea behind
reinforcement learning
is that you can learn
from very sparse rewards.
So, the space of language
and the space of tokens,
whether you're generating language
or tasks for a robot is so big
that you might say that it's like,
the tokenizer for a language model
can be like 200,000 things.
So, at each step, it can sample
from that big of a space.
So, if it can generate a bit of a signal
that it can climb onto,
that's the whole field of RL is around,
is learning from sparse rewards.
And the same thing has played out in math
where it's like very weak models
that sometimes generate answers,
where you see research already
that you can boost their math scores,
you can do this sort of
RL training for math.
It might not be as effective,
but if you take a 1
billion parameter model,
so something 600 times
smaller than DeepSeek,
you can boost its grade school math scores
very directly with a small
amount of this training.
So, it's not to say that
this is coming soon,
setting up the verification
domains is extremely hard,
and there's a lot of nuance in this,
but there are some basic things
that we have seen before,
where it's at least expectable
that there's a domain
and there's a chance that this works.
- All right, so we have fun
things happening in real time.
This is a good opportunity
to talk about other
reasoning models, o1, o3.
Just now, OpenAI as perhaps
expected, released o3-mini.
What are we expecting from
the different flavors?
Can you just lay out the
different flavors of the o models
and from Gemini, the reasoning model?
- Something I would say
about these reasoning models
is we talked a lot
about reasoning training on math and code.
And what is done is that
you have the base model,
we've talked about a lot on the internet.
You do this large-scale reasoning training
with reinforcement learning.
And then, what the DeepSeek
paper detailed in this R1 paper,
which for me is one of
the big open questions
on how do you do this, is
that they did reasoning-heavy,
but very standard post-training techniques
after the large-scale reasoning RL.
So, they did the same things with a form
of instruction tuning
through rejection sampling,
which is essentially heavily
filtered instruction tuning
with some reward models.
And then, they did this RLHF,
but they made it math-heavy.
So, some of this transfer,
we've looked at this
philosophical example early on.
One of the big open questions
is how much does this transfer?
If we bring in domains after
the reasoning training,
are all the models
gonna be become eloquent
writers by reasoning?
Is this philosophy stuff gonna be open?
We don't know in the research
of how much this will transfer.
There's other things about
how we can make soft verifiers
and things like this.
But there is more
training after reasoning,
which makes it easier to
use these reasoning models.
And that's what we're using right now.
So, if we're gonna talk
about o3-mini and o1,
these have gone through
these extra techniques
that are designed for human preferences
after being trained to elicit reasoning.
- I think one of the things
that people are ignoring
is Google's Gemini Flash Thinking
- Yeah.
- is both cheaper
than R1 and better.
- Yeah.
- And they released it in
the beginning of December.
- [Lex] And nobody's talking about it.
- No one cares.
- It has
a different flavor to it.
Its behavior is less expressive
than something like o1
or it has fewer tracks than it is on.
Qwen released a model last fall, QWQ,
which was their preview reasoning model.
And DeepSeek had R1-Lite last fall,
where these models felt
like they're on rails,
where they really, really
only can do math and code.
And o1 is, it can answer anything.
It might not be perfect for some tasks,
but it's flexible, it
has some richness to it.
And this is the art
of how is a model a
little bit undercooked?
It's like, it's good to
get a model out the door,
but it's hard to gauge
and it takes a lot of taste to be like,
is this a full-fledged model?
Can I use this for everything?
And they're probably more
similar for math and code.
My quick read is that Gemini Flash
is not trained the same way as o1,
but taking an existing training stack,
adding reasoning to it.
So, taking a more normal training stack
and adding reasoning to it.
And I'm sure they're gonna have more,
I mean, they've done quick releases
on Gemini Flash, the reasoning,
and this is the second
version from the holidays.
It's evolving fast
and it takes longer to
make this training stack
where you're doing
this large-scale RL.
- Ask it the same question
from earlier, the one about the-
- The human nature.
- Yeah.
- [Lex] What was the human nature one?
- The way I can ramble, why I
can ramble about this so much
is that we've been working
on this at AI2 before o1 was
fully available to everyone,
and before R1,
which is essentially using this
RL training for fine-tuning.
We use this in our Tulu series of models.
And you can elicit the same behaviors
where you say like weight and so much on,
but it's subtle late
in the training process
that this kind of reasoning
expression is much lighter.
So, there's essentially a gradation
and just how much of this RL training
you put into it determines
how the output looks.
- So, we're now using Gemini 2.0
Flash Thinking Experimental 01-21.
- It summarized the prompt
as humans self-domesticated apes.
(Nathan and Lex laughing)
- Perspective. Okay.
All right. So, wait, is this
revealing the reasoning?
Here's why this is a novel. Oh, okay.
- You click to expand.
- Oh, yeah, click to expand.
- Okay. Analyze the request.
Novel is the key word.
- See how it just looks
a little different.
It looks like a normal output. (chuckles)
- Yeah, it's...
In some sense, it's better
structured, it makes more sense.
And-
- When it latched onto human
and then it went into organisms,
and oh wow.
(Nathan laughing)
- Apex predator, focus on domestication.
Apply domestication to humans,
explore the idea of self-domestication.
(Lex and Nathan laughing)
- Not good, not good.
- Where is this going?
Refine, articulate the insight.
Greater facial expressiveness
and communication ability.
Yes. (chuckles)
Plasticity and adaptability. Yes.
Dependence on social groups. Yes.
All right.
And self-critique and refined further.
Wow. Is this truly novel?
Is it well-supported?
(Nathan chuckles)
So on and so forth.
And the insight is getting at is humans
are not just social animals,
but profoundly self-domesticated apes.
And this self-domestication is the key
to understanding our unique
cognitive and social abilities.
Self-domesticated apes.
(Nathan laughing)
Self-
- I prefer
the DeepSeek response. (chuckles)
- Self do...
I mean, it's novel.
The insight is novel.
(Nathan laughing)
That's like a good book
title, self-domesticated apes.
There could be a case made for that.
Yeah, it's cool and it's
revealing the reasoning.
It's magical. It's magical.
This is really powerful.
Hello, everyone, this is Lex
with a quick intermission,
recorded after the podcast.
Since we've reviewed
responses from DeepSeek-R1
and Gemini Flash 2.0 Thinking
during this conversation,
I thought at this moment, it would be nice
to insert myself quickly doing
the same for OpenAI o1 Pro
and o3-mini with the same prompt,
the prompt being, give one truly
novel insight about humans.
And I thought I would in general,
give my vibe check and
vibe-based anecdotal report
on my own experiences with
the new o-3 mini model,
now that I got a chance to
spend many hours with it
in different kinds of
contexts and applications.
So, I would probably
categorize this question as a,
let's say, open-ended
philosophical question.
And in particular, the emphasis on novelty
I think is a nice way
to test one of the
capabilities of the model,
which is come up with
something that makes you pause
and almost surprise you
with its brilliance.
So, that said, my general review
after running each of the models
on this question a bunch of times
is that o1 Pro consistently
gave brilliant answers.
Once, they gave me
pause and made me think,
both cutting in its insight
and just really nicely phrased
with clarity, with nuance,
over and over consistently
generating the best answers.
After that is R1, which
was less consistent,
but again, deliver brilliance.
Gemini Flash 2.0 Thinking was third.
And last was o3-mini actually.
It often gave quite a generic answer,
at least to my particular sensibilities.
That said, in a bunch
of other applications
that I tested for brainstorming purposes,
it actually worked extremely
well and often outperformed R1.
But on this open-ended
philosophical question,
it did consistently worse.
Now, another important element
for each of these models is
how the reasoning is presented.
DeepSeek-R1 shows the full
chain of thought tokens,
which I personally just love.
For these open-ended
philosophical questions,
it's really, really interesting
to see the model think through it,
but really also just stepping back,
me as a person who
appreciates intelligence
and reasoning and reflection,
reading these kind of chain
of thought, raw tokens of R1,
there's something genuinely beautiful
about observing the path of deliberation
in an intelligent system.
I think we don't always
have that explicitly
laid out for us humans.
So, to see it in another
intelligence system,
the non-linearity of it
akin to "Ulysses" or "Finnegans
Wake" by James Joyce.
It's just beautiful to watch.
Anyways, we discussed in the episode,
DeepSeek-R1 talked about humans being able
to convert selfish desires
into cooperative systems
by collectively pretending abstract rules
like money laws and rights are real.
And these shared
hallucinations act as games
where competition is secretly redirected
to benefit the group, turning
conflict into society's fuel.
Gemini 2.0 Flash Thinking said,
"Humans are not just social animals,
but self-domesticated apes,
and this self-domestication is the key
to understanding our unique
cognitive and social abilities."
Now, it's important to say
that the chain of thought
there was really interesting.
It was looking through
the entire evolution
of life on earth,
considering apex predators,
and considering how from that,
we ended up to where we are.
I think that domestication
by choice is a really interesting angle.
Again, it's one of those things
when somebody presents a different angle
on a seemingly obvious thing,
it just makes me smile.
And the same with DeepSeek-R1,
that these hallucinations
of money laws and rights
and us collectively
pretending like it's real,
and we play games with them
that look like competition,
when secretly, we're just
cooperating with each other.
And that is the fuel of
progress, beautifully put.
Now, OpenAI o1 Pro
consistently over and
over, delivered bangers.
I can go through many of them,
but the first one was,
"Humans are the only species
that turns raw materials
into symbolic resources,
then uses those symbols
to reorganize the very
materials they came from,
creating a closed feedback loop
between meaning and matter."
Here, I just ran it again, (laughs)
banger after banger, I'm telling you.
"Humans are unique among known species
in that they simultaneously
rewrite two layers of reality,
the external world and their
own private mental landscapes,
and then merge these two rewritten layers
into a continuous personal narrative
that feels objectively true, feels true."
This is poetry. Okay.
And then, o3-mini-high for me
was smart, fast actually,
and kind of generic.
Never quite got there for me.
So, here's the first
one I got from o3-mini.
"Humans are not fixed beings
but rather ongoing
narratives, dynamic stories
that we continuously write,
edit, and reinterpret.
This narrative plasticity
is more than just memory
or self-reflection.
It's an intrinsic cognitive process
that acts like an internal
error correction system.
It allows us to adapt our identities
and values over time in response
to new experiences,
challenges, and social context.
Now, it almost sneaks up
to something approximating cutting insight
with narrative plasticity in quotes.
But then, it goes back to
the generic, I don't know.
All of these models are
incredible for different reasons.
There's a lot of concerns as
we discussed in this episode,
but there's a lot of reasons
to be excited as well.
And I've probably spoken for too long.
I am severely sleep-deprived,
borderline delirious.
So, hopefully, some of this made sense.
And now, dear friends,
back to the episode.
- I think when you, to Nathan's point,
when you look at the reasoning models,
to me, even when I used R1 versus o1,
there was that sort of rough
or edges around the corner feeling.
And Flash Thinking, earlier,
I didn't use this version,
but the one from December,
and it definitely had that rough edges
around the corner feeling,
where it's just not fleshed
out in as many ways.
Sure, they added math
and coding capabilities
via these verifiers in RL,
but it feels like they lost
something in certain areas.
And o1 is worse performing than chat
in many areas as well, to be clear.
- Not by a lot.
- Not by a lot though.
And R1 definitely felt to me
like it was worse than
V3 in certain areas,
like doing this RL
expressed and learned a lot,
but then it weakened in other areas.
And so, I think that's
one of the big differences
between these models, and what o1 offers.
And then, OpenAI has o1 Pro.
And what they did with o3,
which is like also very unique,
is that they stacked search
on top of chain of thought.
And so, chain of thought is
one thing, where it's able,
it's one chain, it backtracks,
goes back and forth,
but how they solved the ARC-AGI challenge
was not just the chain of thought.
It was also sampling many times,
i.e, running them in
parallel, and then selecting.
- Is running in parallel actually search?
Because I don't know
if we have the full information
on how o1 Pro works.
So, like I'm not, I don't
- That's right.
- have enough information
- Agree.
- to confidently say that it is searched.
- It is parallel samples.
- Yeah.
And then, what?
- And it selects something.
- And we don't know what
the selection function is.
The reason why we're debating
is because since o1 was announced,
there's been a lot of
interest in techniques
called Monte Carlo Tree Search,
- Mm-hmm.
- which is where
you will break down the chain of thought
into intermediate steps.
We haven't defined chain of thought.
Chain of thought is from
a paper from years ago
where you introduced the
idea to ask a language model
that at the time, was
much less easy to use.
You would say, let's verify step by step,
and it would induce the model
to do this bulleted list of steps.
Chain of thought is now
almost a default in models
where if you ask in a math question,
you don't need to tell
it to think step by step.
And the idea with Monte Carlo Tree Search
is that you would take an
intermediate point in that train,
do some sort of expansion,
spend more compute,
and then select the right one.
That's like a very complex form of search
that has been used in things
like MuZero and AlphaZero potentially.
I know MuZero does this.
- Another form of search
is just asking five different
people, and then taking
the majority answer.
- Yes.
- There's a variety of like,
(Nathan chuckles)
it could be complicated,
it could be simple.
We don't know what it is,
just that they are not
just issuing one chain
of thought in sequence.
- Yeah.
- They're launching many
in parallel, and in the ARC-AGI,
they launched a thousand
in parallel for their,
the one that really shocked everyone,
that beat the benchmark
was they would launch
a thousand in parallel,
and then they would get the right answer,
like 80% of the time or 70%
of the time, 90 maybe even.
Whereas if they just launched
one, it was like 30%.
- There are many extensions to this.
I would say the simplest one
is that our language models
to date have been designed
to give the right answer
the highest percentage of
the time in one response.
And we are now opening
the door to different ways
of running inference on
our models in which we need
to reevaluate many parts
of the training process,
which normally opens the
door to more progress,
but we don't know if OpenAI changed a lot
or if just sampling
more in multiple choices
what they're doing,
or if it's something more complex
where they changed the training
and they know that the inference mode
is going to be different.
- So, we're talking
about o1 Pro $200 a month
and they're losing money.
So, the thing that we're referring to,
this fascinating exploration
of the test-time compute space,
is that actually possible?
Do we have enough compute for that?
Does the financials make sense?
- So, the fantastic thing is,
and it's in the thing
that I pulled up earlier,
but the cost for GPT-3 has plummeted.
If you scroll up just
a few images, I think.
The important thing about like,
hey, is cost limiting factor here?
My view is that we'll have
really awesome intelligence
before we have,
like AGI before we have it
permeate throughout the economy.
And this is why that reason is.
GPT-3 was trained in what, 2020, 2021?
And the cost for running inference on it
was 60, $70 per million tokens,
which was the cost per
intelligence was ridiculous.
Now, as we scaled forward two years,
we've had a 1,200x reduction in cost
to achieve the same level
of intelligence as GPT-3.
- So, here on the x-axis is time
over just a couple of years.
And on the y-axis is log
scale dollars to run inference
on a millions-
- Yes, dollars.
Yeah, a million.
- And so, you have just a down,
like a linear decline on log
scale from GPT-3 through 3.5
to Llama.
- It's like 5 cents
or something like that now,
which is versus $60, 1,200x.
- Yeah.
Yeah.
- That's not
the exact numbers, but it's 1,200x.
I remember that number.
Is humongous cost per intelligence.
Now, the freak out over DeepSeek is,
oh my god, they made it so cheap.
It's like actually, if you
look at this trend line,
they're not below the
trend line, first of all,
and at least for GPT-3.
(Nathan laughing)
They are the first to hit
it, which is a big deal.
But they're not below the
trend line as far as GPT-3.
Now, we have GPT-4,
what's gonna happen with
these reasoning capabilities.
It's a mix of architectural innovations,
it's a mix of better data,
and it's gonna be better
training techniques,
and all of these better inference
systems, better hardware.
Going from each generation
of GPU to new generations, or ASICs,
everything is gonna take
this cost curve down and
down and down and down.
And then, can I just spawn
a thousand different LLMs
to create a task, and then
pick from one of them?
Or whatever search technique,
I want a Tree, Monte Carlo Tree Research.
Maybe it gets that
complicated, maybe it doesn't,
'cause it's too complicated
to actually scale, who knows?
Bitter lesson, right?
The question is I think when not if,
because the rate of progress is so fast.
Nine months ago, Dario was saying, hey,
or Dario said nine months ago,
the cost to train an inference was this.
And now, we're much better than this.
And DeepSeek is much better than this.
And that cost curve for GPT-4,
which was also roughly
$60 per million tokens
when it launched, has
already fallen to $2 or so.
And we're gonna get it
down to cents probably
for GPT-4 quality and the same...
And that's the base for
the reasoning models
like o1 that we have today,
and o1 Pro is spawning multiple.
And o3 and so on and so forth.
These search techniques'
too expensive today,
but they will get cheaper.
And that's what's gonna
unlock the intelligence.
- So, it'll get cheaper
and cheaper and cheaper.
The big DeepSeek-R1 release
freaked everybody out,
because of the cheaper,
one of the manifestations of
that is Nvidia stock plummeted.
Can you explain what happened?
And also just explain this moment
and whether if Nvidia's
gonna keep winning.
- We are both Nvidia
bulls here, I would say.
And in some ways, the market
response is reasonable.
Most of the market,
like Nvidia's biggest customers in the US
are major tech companies, and
they're spending a ton on AI.
And if a simple interpretation
of DeepSeek is you can
get really good models
without spending as much on AI.
So, in that capacity, it's like, oh,
maybe these big tech companies
won't need to spend as
much in AI and go down.
The actual thing that happened,
it's much more complex,
where there's social factors,
where there's the rising in the App Store,
the social contagion that is happening.
And then, I think some
of it's just like...
I don't trade,
I don't know anything
about financial markets,
but it builds up over the weekend,
where the social pressure,
where it's like if it was during the week
and there was multiple days of trading
when this was really becoming,
but it comes on the weekend,
and then everybody wants to sell.
And that is a social contagion.
- I think, and like there were
a lot of false narratives,
which is like, hey,
these guys are spending
billions on models.
And they're not spending
billions on models.
No one spent more than a billion dollars
on a model that's released publicly.
GPT-4 was a couple hundred million,
and then they've reduced
the cost for Turbo 4o.
But billion dollar model runs are coming.
And this concludes
pre-training and post-training.
And then, the other number is like,
hey, DeepSeek didn't include everything.
They didn't include...
A lot of the cost
goes to research and
all this sort of stuff.
A lot of the cost goes to inference.
A lot of the cost goes to post-training.
None of these things were factor.
- Yeah.
- It's research salaries.
All these things are
counted in the billions
of dollars that OpenAI is spending,
but they weren't counted in the,
hey, 6 million, $5 million
that DeepSeek spent.
So, there's a bit
of misunderstanding of
what these numbers are.
And then, there's also an element of
Nvidia's just been a straight line up.
And there's been so many
different narratives
that have been trying to push down Nvidia.
I don't say push down Nvidia stock.
Everyone is looking for a
reason to sell or to be worried.
It was Blackwell delays.
Their GPU was, there's a lot of report...
Every two weeks,
there's a new report about
their GPUs being delayed.
There's the whole thing
about scaling laws ending.
It's so ironic.
- [Nathan] It lasted a month. (laughs)
It was just literally just,
hey, models aren't getting better.
They're just not getting better.
There's no reason to spend more,
pre-training scaling is dead,
and then it's like, o1, o3.
- R1. (laughs)
- R1.
And now, it's like, wait,
models are getting too,
they're progressing too fast,
(Nathan laughing)
slow down the progress,
stop spending on GPUs.
- Yeah.
- And it's...
But the funniest thing I think
that comes out of this is
Jevons Paradox is true.
AWS pricing for H100s
has gone up over the last couple weeks.
Since a little bit after Christmas,
since V3 was launched, AWS
H100 pricing has gone up.
H200s are almost out of stock everywhere,
because H200 has more memory,
and therefore, R1 wants
that chip over H100.
- We were trying to get GPUs
on a short notice this week for a demo,
and it wasn't that easy.
We were trying to get just 16
or 32 H100s for demo,
and it was not very easy.
(Nathan chuckles)
- So, for people
who don't Jevons Paradox
is when the efficiency goes up, somehow,
magically, counterintuitively,
the total resource
consumption goes up as well.
- And semiconductors is, we're
at 50 years of Moore's Law,
every two years half the cost,
double the transistors
just like clockwork.
And it's slowed down obviously,
but the semiconductor industry
is gone up the whole time.
It's been wavy.
There's obviously cycles and stuff,
and I don't expect AI to be any different.
There's gonna be ebbs and flows,
but this is in AI,
it's just playing out
at an insane timescale.
It was 2x every two years.
This is 1,200x in like three years.
So, it's like,
(Nathan laughing)
the scale of improvement
that is hard to get wrap your head around.
- Yeah, I was confused,
because to me, Nvidia stock
on that should have gone up.
But maybe it went down
because there's suspicion of foul play
on the side of China, something like this.
But if you just look purely
at the actual principles
at play here, it's obvious.
Yeah, Jevons Paradox.
- More progress that AI makes
or the higher the derivative
of AI progress is,
especially you should, because
Nvidia's in the best place.
The higher the derivative is,
the sooner the market's gonna
be bigger and expanding.
And Nvidia's the only one
that does everything
- Yeah.
- reliably right now.
- Because it's not like an
Nvidia competitor arose.
It's another company
that's using Nvidia, so-
- Who historically has been
a large Nvidia customer.
- Yeah. (chuckles)
- And has press releases
about them cheering about
being China's biggest
Nvidia customer.
(Nathan laughing)
- [Lex] Yeah, it made it-
- Obviously they've quieted down,
but I think that's another element of is,
that they don't wanna say
how many GPUs they have.
- Yeah.
- Because hey, yes,
they have H800s,
yes, they have H20s, they
also have some H100s,
which are smuggled in.
- So, can you speak to that,
to the smuggling?
What's the scale of smuggling
that's feasible for a nation
state to do for companies?
Is it possible to-
- I think there's a few
angles of smuggling here.
One is ByteDance arguably
is the largest smuggler of GPUs for China.
China's not supposed to have GPUs.
ByteDance has like over 500,000 GPUs. Why?
Because they're all rented from
companies around the world.
They rent from Oracle,
they rent from Google,
they rent from all these mass...
And a bunch of smaller
cloud companies too.
All the Neoclouds of the world.
They rent so, so many GPUs,
they also buy a bunch.
And they do this
for mostly like what Meta
does, serving TikTok,
serving next best separate-
- Same discussion.
- Same as kind, to be clear,
that's today the view use.
- Yeah.
- And it's a valid use.
Hack the dopamine circuit.
Now, that's theoretically
now very much restricted
with the AI diffusion rules,
which happened in the last
week of the Biden admin
and Trump admin looks like
they're gonna keep 'em,
which limits allies, even like Singapore,
which Singapore is like 20,
30% of Nvidia's revenue.
But Singapore's had a moratorium
on not building data
centers for like 15 years,
'cause they don't have enough power.
So, where are they going?
(Dylan laughing)
- [Nathan] Oh yeah. (laughs)
- I'm not claiming they're
all going to China,
but a portion are,
many are going to Malaysia,
including Microsoft
and Oracle have big data
centers in Malaysia.
They're going all over
Southeast Asia probably,
India as well.
There's stuff routing,
but the diffusion rules are very de facto.
You can only buy this many
GPUs from this country.
And you can only rent a cluster this large
to companies that are Chinese.
They're very explicit on
trying to stop smuggling.
And a big chunk of it was, hey,
random company by 16
servers ship them to China.
There's actually, I saw
a photo from someone
in the semiconductor industry
who leads like a team for networking chips
that competes with Nvidia.
And he sent a photo
of a guy checking into a
first-class united flight
from San Francisco to
Shanghai or Shenzhen,
with a super micro box that is this big,
which can only contain GPUs.
(Nathan chuckles)
And he was booking first-class,
'cause think about it,
3 to 5k for your first-class ticket,
server costs 240,000 in the US, to 50,000.
You sell it for 300,000 in China,
wait, you just got a
free first-class ticket
- Yeah.
- and a lot more money.
So, it's like...
And then, that's like
small-scale smuggling.
Most of the large-scale smuggling
is like companies in
Singapore and Malaysia
routing 'em around, or renting GPUs
completely legally.
- I wanna jump in.
How much does this scale?
I think there's been some
number, like some people
that are higher level
economics understanding,
say that it's like as you go
from 1 billion of smuggling to 10 billion,
it's like you're hiding certain
levels of economic activity.
And that's the most reasonable thing to me
is that there's gonna be some
level where it's so obvious
that it's easier to find
this economic activity.
And-
- Yeah.
So, my belief is that
last year, roughly...
So, Nvidia made a million H20s,
which are legally allowed
to be shipped to China,
which we talked about
is better for reasoning,
inference at least.
Maybe not training, but
reasoning, inference.
And inference generally.
Then, they also had a couple 100,000,
we think like 200 to 300,000 GPUs
were routed to China
from Singapore, Malaysia, US, wherever.
Companies spun up by 16 GPUs, 64 GPUs,
whatever it is routed,
and Huawei's known for having
spent up a massive network
of companies to get
the materials they need
after they were banned in 2018.
So, it's not like
otherworldly, but I agree.
Nathan's point is like, hey,
you can't smuggle up $10 billion of GPUs.
And then, the third source,
which is just now banned
and which wasn't considered smuggling,
but is China is renting, I
believe from our research,
Oracle's biggest GPU
customer is ByteDance.
And for Google, I think it's
their second biggest customer.
And so, like, and you go
down the list of clouds
and especially these
smaller cloud companies
that aren't like that hyperscalers.
Think beyond core of even Lambda
even, there's a whole sea,
there's 60 different
new cloud companies serving Nvidia GPUs.
I think ByteDance is renting
a lot of these all over it.
And so, these companies are renting GPUs
to Chinese companies,
and that was completely legal
up until the diffusion rules,
which happened just a few weeks ago.
And even now, you can rent GPU clusters
that are less than 2,000 GPUs.
Or you can buy GPUs and
ship them wherever you want
if they're less than 1,500 GPUs.
So, it's like there are
still some ways to smuggle,
but yeah, as the numbers grow,
100 something billion dollars of revenue
for Nvidia last year, 200
something billion this year.
And if next year,
it could nearly double
again or more than double
based on what we see with
data center footprints
like being built out
all across the US and
the rest of the world,
it's gonna be really hard
for China to keep up with these rules.
Yes, there will always be smuggling
and DeepSeek level models
of GPT-4 level models,
o1 level models capable to
train on what China can get,
even the next tier above that.
But if we speed run a couple more jumps
to billion dollar models,
$10 billion models,
then it becomes, hey,
there is a compute disadvantage for China
for training models and serving them.
And the serving part is really critical.
DeepSeek cannot serve their model today.
It's completely out of inventory.
It's already started falling
in the App Store actually, downloads,
because you download
it, you try and sign up,
they say, we're not taking registrations,
'cause they have no capacity.
You open it up, you get less
than five tokens per second
if you even get your request approved.
Because there's just no capacity,
because they just don't have
enough GPUs to serve the model,
even though it's incredibly efficient.
- It'd be fascinating
to watch the smuggling,
'cause there's drug smuggling.
That's a market.
There's weapons smuggling.
And GPUs will surpass that
at some point.
- Chips are highest value
per kilogram, probably by far. (chuckles)
- Oh man.
- I have another question
for you, Dylan.
Do you track model API
access internationally?
How easy is it for Chinese companies
to use hosted model APIs from the US?
- Yeah, that's incredibly easy.
OpenAI publicly stated
DeepSeek uses their API.
And they say they have evidence.
And this is another element
of the training regime
is people at OpenAI have claimed
that it's a distilled model.
i.e, you're taking OpenAI's model,
you're generating a lot of output,
and then you're training on
the output in their model.
- Yeah.
- And even if that's the case,
what they did is still
amazing, by the way,
what DeepSeek did, efficiency-wise.
- Distillation is standard
practice in industry.
Whether or not, if you're at a closed lab
where you care about terms
of service and IP closely,
you distill from your own models.
If you are a researcher
and you're not building any products,
you distill from the OpenAI models.
- This is a good opportunity.
Can you explain big picture
distillation as a process?
What is distillation?
What's the process
- We've
- of distillation?
- talked a lot about
training language models.
They are trained on text.
And post-training,
you're trying to train
on very high quality text
that you want the model
to match the features of.
Or if you're using RL,
you're letting the model
find its own thing.
But for supervised fine-tuning,
for preference data, you
need to have some completions
what the model is trying
to learn to imitate.
And what you do there is,
instead of a human data
or instead of the model
you're currently training,
you take completions from a different,
normally more powerful model.
I think there's rumors
that these big models
that people are waiting for,
these GPT-5s of the world,
the Claude 3 Opuses of the world,
are used internally to do
this distillation process
at OpenAI.
- There's also
public examples, like
Meta explicitly stated,
not necessarily distilling,
but they used 405b as a reward model
for 70b in their Llama 3.2
- Yes.
- or 3.3.
This is all the same topic.
- So, (sighs) is this
ethical? Is this legal?
Why is that "Financial
Times" article headline say,
OpenAI says that there's evidence
that China's DeepSeek used
its model to train competitor.
- This is a long, at
least in the academic side
and research side, it has a long history,
'cause you're trying to
interpret OpenAI's rule.
OpenAI's terms of service say
that you cannot build a competitor
with outputs from their models.
Terms of service are
different than a license,
which are essentially a
contract between organizations.
So, if you have a terms of
service on OpenAI's account,
if I violate it, OpenAI
can cancel my account.
This is very different than like a license
that says how you could
use a downstream artifact.
So, a lot of it hinges on a word
that is very unclear in the AI space,
which is what is a competitor?
And so-
- And then,
the ethical aspect of it is like,
why is it unethical for me
to train on your bottle
- Yeah.
- when you can train
on the internet's text?
- Yeah.
- Right?
- So, there's a bit of a hypocrisy,
because OpenAI and potentially
most of the companies
trained on the internet's
text without permission.
- There's also a clear loophole,
which is that I generate data from OpenAI,
and then I upload it somewhere,
and then somebody else trains on it
and the link has been broken.
They're not under the same
terms of service contract.
- This is why-
- There's a lot of hippo...
There's a lot of to be discovered details
that don't make a lot of sense.
- This is why a lot of models today,
even if they train on zero OpenAI data,
you ask the model who
trained you, it'll say,
I'm ChatGPT trained by OpenAI.
- Yeah.
- Because there's so much copy-paste
of OpenAI outputs from
that on the internet
that you just weren't
able to filter it out.
And there was nothing in the RL
where they implemented like,
hey, or post-training or SFT,
whatever, that says, hey,
I'm actually modeled by
Allen Institute instead
of OpenAI.
- We have to do this
if we serve a demo.
We do research and we use
OpenAI APIs, because it's useful
and we want to understand post-training,
and our research models,
they'll say they're written by OpenAI
unless we put in the system
prop that we talked about that.
Like, I am Tulu, I am a language model
trained by the Allen Institute for AI.
And if you ask more
people around industry,
especially with post-training,
it's a very doable task
to make the model say who it is
or to suppress the OpenAI thing.
So, in some levels, it
might be that DeepSeek
didn't care that it was
saying that it was by OpenAI.
If you're gonna upload model weights,
it doesn't really matter,
'cause anyone that's
serving it in an application
and cares a lot about serving
is going to, when serving it,
if they're using it for a specific task,
they're gonna tailor it to that.
And it doesn't matter that
it's saying it's ChatGPT.
- Oh, I guess the one
of the ways to do that
is like a system prompt
or something like that.
Like if you're serving
it to say that you're-
- That's what we do.
If we host a demo, you say you are Tulu 3,
a language model trained by
the Allen Institute for AI.
We also are benefited from OpenAI data,
'cause it's a great research tool.
- Do you think there's any truth
and value to the claim,
OpenAI's claim that there's
evidence that China's DeepSeek
use this model to train?
- I think everyone has
benefited regardless,
because the data's on the internet.
And therefore, it's in
your pre-training now.
There are like subreddits
where people share the
best ChatGPT outputs.
And those are in your-
- I think that they're trying
to shift the narrative,
like they're trying to protect themselves.
And we saw this years ago
when ByteDance was actually banned
from some OpenAI APIs
for training on outputs.
There's other AI startups
that most people,
if you're in the AI culture, were like,
they just told us they
trained on OpenAI outputs
and they never got banned.
That's how they bootstrapped
their early models.
So, it's much easier to get
off the ground using this
than to set up human pipelines
and build a strong model.
So, it's long history here
and a lot of the communications
are seem like narrative control.
- Actually, over the last couple days,
we've seen a lot of people
distill DeepSeek's model
into Llama models,
because the DeepSeek models
- Mm-hmm.
- are complicated to run inference on,
because they're mixture of experts
and they're 600 plus billion
parameters and all this.
And people distilled them
into the Llama models.
(Lex laughing)
Because the Llama models
are so easy to serve,
and everyone's built the pipelines
and tooling for inference
- Yeah.
- with the Llama models,
because it's the open standard. (chuckles)
So, we've seen it,
we've seen a roundabout.
Is it bad? Is it illegal?
Maybe it's illegal, whatever.
I don't know about that.
But it's-
- It could break contracts.
I don't think it's illegal,
like in any illegal,
like no one's going to jail for this ever.
- I think fundamentally,
I think it's ethical
or I hope it's ethical,
because the moment becomes,
we ban that kind of thing,
it's gonna make everybody much worse off.
And I also actually, this is difficult,
but I think you should be
allowed to train on the internet.
I know a lot of authors
and creators are very sensitive about it.
That's a difficult question.
But the moment you're not
allowed to train on the internet.
- I agree.
- I have a schizo take on
how you can solve this,
because it already works.
- All right.
- I have a reasonable take on it.
- All right, all right.
(Nathan laughing)
- So, Japan has a law which you're allowed
to train on any training data
and copyrights don't apply if
you wanna train a model, A.
B, Japan has nine gigawatts
of curtailed nuclear power.
C, Japan is allowed under
the AI diffusion rule
to import as many GPUs as they'd like.
So, all we have to do, we
have a market here to make,
we build massive data setters,
we rent them to the labs,
and then we train models in
a legally permissible way,
and there's no if, ands, or buts.
And now, the models have no
potential copyright lawsuit
from "New York Times"
or anything like that.
No, no, it's just completely legal.
- Yeah.
- No, so-
- Genius.
- The early copyright lawsuits
have fallen in the favor of AI training.
I would say that the long tail of use
is gonna go in the side
of AI, which is if you do,
if you scrape the trillions
of tokens of data,
you're not looking and saying,
this one "New York Times"
article is so important to me.
But if you're doing a
audio generation for music
or image generation and you say,
make it in the style of X person,
that's a reasonable case
where you could figure out
what is their profit margin on inference.
I don't know if it's gonna be the 50/50
of YouTube creator program or something,
but I would opt into
that program as a writer,
like, please, like that...
It's gonna be a rough journey,
but there will be some solutions
like that that make sense.
But there's a long tail where
it's just on the internet.
- I think one of the other aspects
of that "Financial Times" article implied.
And so, that leads to a
more general question.
Do you think there's...
How difficult is spying, espionage,
and stealing of actual secret code
and data from inside companies?
How much of that is being attempted?
- Code and data is
hard, but ideas is easy.
Silicon Valley operates
(Dylan chuckles)
- Yeah.
- on the way
that top employees get bought out
by other companies for a pay raise,
and a large reason
why these companies do this
is to bring ideas with them.
And there's no, in California,
there's rules that certain,
like non-competes or whatever,
are illegal in California
and whether or not
there's NDAs and things,
that is how a lot of process happens.
Recently, there was somebody from Gemini
who helped make this 1
million context length
and everyone is saying the next Llama who,
I mean, he went to the Meta team,
is gonna have 1 million context length.
And that's how the world works.
- As far as industrial
espionage and things,
that has been greatly
successful in the past.
The Americans did the Brits,
the Chinese have done it to the Americans,
and so on and so forth.
It is a fact of life.
And so, to argue industrial espionage
can be stopped is probably unlikely.
You can make it difficult.
But even then, there's
all these stories about,
hey, F35 and F22 have
already been given to China
in terms of design plans and stuff.
Code and stuff like
between, I say companies,
not nation states is
probably very difficult,
but ideas are discussed a lot.
Whether it be a house
party in San Francisco
or a company changing employees,
or always the mythical honeypot
that always gets talked about,
like someone gets honeypotted.
Because everyone working on AI
is a single dude who's
in their 20s and 30s.
Not everyone, but a insane percentages.
So, there's always all these
you know, and obviously-
- So, honeypotted is like a spy,
a female spy approaches you and like-
- Yeah, yeah.
- Or male.
It's San Francisco, but...
(Nathan laughing)
As a single dude, I will
say, in his late 20s,
it is like, we are very easily corrupted.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Not corrupted myself,
but we are, we are.
- Yeah.
Everybody else, not me.
Everybody else.
- Yeah. Exactly.
- I'm too oblivious that I am not single.
So, I'm safe from one
espionage access. (laughs)
- Yeah, you have to make sure
to close all security vulnerabilities.
So, you, Dylan, collect
a lot of information
about each of the mega clusters
for each of the major AI companies.
Can you talk about the buildouts
for each one that stand out?
- Yeah, so I think the thing
that's really important about
these mega cluster buildouts
is they're completely
unprecedented in scale.
US, data center power consumption
has been slowly on the rise
and it's gone up to 2, 3%
even through the cloud
computing revolution.
Data center consumption as
a percentage of total US.
And that's been over decades
of data centers, et cetera.
It's been climbing, climbing slowly.
But now, 2 to 3%.
Now, by the end of this
decade, even under like,
when I say 10%, a lot of
people that are traditionally
by 2028, 2030,
a traditional data center
people like, that's nuts.
But then, people who are in AI
who have really looked at this
at the Anthropics and OpenAIs,
they're like, that's not enough.
And I'm like, okay.
- Mm-hmm. (chuckles)
- But this is both through
globally distributed
or distributed throughout the US,
as well as centralized clusters.
The distributed throughout
the US is exciting
and it's the bulk of it.
Like, hey, OpenAI or say,
Meta is adding a gigawatt.
But most of it is distributed
through the US for inference
and all these other things.
- So, maybe we should lay
it out what a cluster is.
So, does this include AWS?
Maybe it's good
to talk about the
different kinds of clusters
and what you mean by mega clusters,
and what's the GPU
- Mm-hmm.
- and what's the computer and what...
I'm just kidding.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Not that far back, but yeah.
So, what do we mean by the clusters,
- Oh man.
- the build outs?
- I thought I was about
to do the Apple ad.
What's a computer?
(group laughing)
So, traditionally, data
centers and data center tasks
have been a distributed systems problem
that is capable of being
spread very far and widely.
i.e, I send a request to Google,
it gets routed to a data
center somewhat close to me.
It does whatever search
ranking recommendation,
sends a result back.
The nature of the task is
changing rapidly in that the task,
there's two tasks that people
are really focused on now.
It's not database access,
it's not serve me the right
page, serve me the right ad.
It's now a inference.
And inference is dramatically different
from traditional distributed systems,
but it looks a lot more similar.
And then, there's training.
The train inference
side is still like, hey,
I'm gonna put thousands of GPUs
in blocks all around these data centers.
I'm gonna run models on them,
user submits a request,
it gets kicked off,
or hey, my service, they
submit a request to my service.
They're on Word,
and they're like, oh
yeah, help me, Copilot.
And it starts, kicks it off,
or I'm on my Windows, Copilot, whatever,
Apple Intelligence, whatever it is,
it gets kicked off to a data center.
And that data center does
some work and sends it back.
That's inference. That is going
to be the bulk of compute.
And that's like, there's
thousands of data centers
that we're tracking with satellites
and all these other things.
And those are the bulk
of what's being built.
But the scale of...
And so, that's like
what's really reshaping
and that's what's
getting millions of GPUs.
But the scale of the largest cluster
is also really important.
When we look back at history,
or through the age of AI,
it was a really big deal
when they did AlexNet on I think two GPUs
or four GPUs.
- Yeah.
- [Dylan] I don't remember.
It was a really big deal.
- Oh, it's a big deal,
'cause you use GPUs.
(Nathan laughing)
- It's a big deal
they use GPUs and they used multiple.
But then over time, its scale
has just been compounding.
And so, when you skip
forward to GPT-3, then GPT 4,
GPT-4, 20,000 A100 GPUs,
unprecedented run in terms
of the size and the cost.
A couple hundred million
dollars on a YOLO.
A YOLO run for GPT-4.
And it yielded this magical improvement
that was perfectly in line
with what was experimented
and just like a log scale right up.
- Oh yeah, they had that
plot from the paper.
Scaling the technical were part.
- The scaling laws were perfect.
But that's not a crazy number.
20,000 A100s, roughly each
GPU is consuming 400 watts.
And then, when you add
in the whole server,
everything, it's like 15
to 20 megawatts of power.
Maybe you could look up what the power
of consumption of a person is
because the numbers are gonna get silly.
But 15 to 20 megawatts
was standard data center
size was just unprecedented.
That was all GPUs running one task.
- [Nathan] How many watts
is a toaster? (chuckles)
- A toaster is like also-
- That's a good example.
- A similar power consumption to an A100.
H100 comes around,
(Nathan chuckles)
they increase the power
from like 400 to 700 watts.
And that's just per GPU.
And then, there's all the
associated stuff around it.
So, once you count all that,
it's roughly like 1,200 to
1,400 watts for everything,
networking, CPUs,
memory, blah, blah, blah.
- So, we should also
say, so what's required?
You said power.
So, a lot of power is required,
a lot of heat is generated,
so the cooling is required.
And because there's a lot
of GPUs that have to be,
or CPUs or whatever, they
have to be connected.
So, there's a lot of networking,
right?
- Yeah, yeah, so I think...
Yeah, sorry for skipping past that.
And then, the data center
itself is complicated.
But these are still
standardized data centers for GPT-4 scale.
Now, we step forward to what
is the scale of clusters
that people have built last year.
And it ranges widely.
It ranges from like, hey,
these are standard data centers
and we're just using multiple of them
and connecting them together really
with a ton of fiber between them,
a lot of networking, et cetera.
That's what OpenAI and
Microsoft did in Arizona.
And so, they have 100,000 GPUs.
Meta, similar thing.
They took their standard
existing data center design,
and it looks like an H,
and they connected
multiple on 'em together.
And they got to,
they first did 16,000
GPUs, 24,000 GPUs total.
Only 16 of them,
1,000 of 'em were running
on the training run,
because GPUs are very unreliable.
So, they needed to have
spares to swap in and out.
All the way to like now 100,000 GPUs
that they're training
on Llama 4 on currently.
Like 128,000 or so.
Think about 100,000 GPUs with
roughly 1,400 watts a piece,
that's 140 megawatts, 150
megawatts for 128, right?
So, you're talking about
you've jumped from 15
to 20 megawatts to 10x,
almost 10x that number, 9x that number
to 150 megawatts in two
years, from 2022 to 2024.
And some people like
Elon that he admittedly,
and he says himself got into
the game a little bit late
for pre-training large language models.
xAI was started later.
But then, he bet heaven and
hell to get his data center up
and get the largest cluster in the world,
which is 200,000 GPUs.
And he did that. He bought
a factory in Memphis.
He's upgrading the
substation with the same time
he's got a bunch of
mobile power generation,
a bunch of single cycle combine.
He tapped the natural gas line
that's right next to the factory
and is just pulling a
ton of gas, burning gas.
He's generating all this power.
He's in a factory and
an old appliance factory
that's shut down and
moved to China long ago.
And he's got 200,000 GPUs in it.
And now, what's the next scale?
All the hyperscalers have done this.
Now, the next scale is
something that's even bigger.
And so, Elon, just to stick on the topic,
he's building his own natural gas plant,
like a proper one right next door.
He's deploying tons of
Tesla megapack batteries
to make the power more smooth
and all sorts of other things.
He's got industrial chillers
to cool the water down
because he's water-cooling the chips.
So, all these crazy things
to get the clusters bigger and bigger.
But when you look at, like, say,
what OpenAI did with Stargate,
that in Arizona, in Abilene, Texas,
what they've announced at least.
It's not built. Elon says
they don't have the money.
There's some debates about this.
But at full-scale, at
least the first section
is definitely money's accounted for,
but there's multiple sections.
But full scale, that data center
is gonna be 2.2 gigawatts.
2,200 megawatts of power in
and roughly 1.8 gigawatts
or 1,800 megawatt,
yeah, 1,800 megawatts of
power delivered to chips.
Now, this is an absurd scale.
2.2 gigawatts is like more
than most cities to be clear.
And delivered to a single cluster
that's connected to do training.
To train these models, to
do both the pre-training,
the post-training, all of this stuff.
- This is insane.
- It is.
- Insane.
- What is a nuclear
power plant again-
- everyone is doing this.
Everyone is doing this.
(Lex laughing)
Meta in Louisiana,
they're building two natural
gas plants, massive ones,
and then they're building
this massive data center.
Amazon has plans for this scale.
Google has plans for this scale.
xAI has plans for this scale.
The guys that are racing,
the companies that are
racing are racing hard,
and they're doing multi
gigawatt data centers
to build this out,
because they think that,
yeah, if I now have...
Obviously, pre-training
scaling is gonna continue,
but to some extent,
but then also all this
post-training stuff,
where you have a RL sandbox
for computer use or whatever.
This is where they're gonna...
And all these viable domains
where they just keep learning and learning
and learning, self-play,
whatever, whatever it is,
makes the AI so much more capable
because the line does go up.
As you throw more compute,
you get more performance.
The shirt is about scaling laws.
To some extent, it is diminishing returns.
You 10x the compute, you
don't get 10x better model.
You get a diminishing returns,
but also you get efficiency improvements.
So, you bend the curve.
And these scale of data centers are doing,
wreaking a lot of havoc on the network.
Nathan was mentioning there's,
Amazon has tried to buy this
nuclear power plant, Talen.
And if you look at the Talen's stock,
it's just skyrocketing.
And they're building a massive
multi gigawatt data center there.
And you just go down the list.
There's so many ramifications.
Interesting thing is
certain regions of the US
transmitting power cost more
than actually generating it.
Because the grid is so slow to build,
and the demand for power and
the ability to build power
and re-ramping on a natural gas plant
or even a coal plant is
like easy enough to do.
But transmitting the power is really hard.
So, in some parts of the
US, like in Virginia,
it costs more to transmit power
than it cost to generate it.
Which is like, there's all sorts
of second order effects
that are insane here.
- And the power grid
support this kind of growth?
- Trump's executive orders,
there was a Biden executive order
before the end of the year,
but then Trump had some
more executive orders,
which hopefully reduce the regulations
to where, yes, things can be built.
But yeah, this is a big, big challenge.
Is building enough power fast enough?
- Are you gonna basically
have a nuclear power plant
next to a data center
for each one of these?
- So, the fun thing here
is this is too slow.
- [Nathan] To build the power plant.
- To build a power plant
or to reconfigure an existing
power plant is too slow.
And so, therefore, you must use natural...
Data center power consumption is flat.
It spike-
- Which is why nuclear
is also good for it.
Like long-term, nuclear
is a very natural fit,
- Yeah, it's-
- but you can't do solar
or anything in the short-term like that.
- Because data center power is like this.
You're telling me, I'm gonna buy tens
of billions of dollars
of GPUs and idle them,
'cause the power's not being generated?
Power's cheap.
If you look at the cost of a cluster,
less than 20% of it is power.
Most of it is the capital cost
and depreciation of the GPUs.
And so, it's like, well, screw it,
I'll just build natural gas plants.
This is what Meta is doing in Louisiana.
This is what OpenAI's doing in Texas
and all these different places.
They may not be doing it directly,
but they are partnered with someone.
And so, there is a couple hopes. One is...
And Elon, what he is
doing in Memphis is like,
to the extreme,
they're not just using
dual combine cycle gas,
which is like super efficient,
he's also just using single cycle
and mobile generators and
stuff, which is less efficient.
But there's also the flip side,
which is solar power
generation is like this,
and wind is another like
this, correlate different.
So, if you stack both of those,
plus you get a big chunk of batteries,
plus you have a little bit of gas,
it is possible to run it more green.
It's just the timescales for that is slow.
So, people are trying,
- Mm-hmm.
- but Meta basically said, whatever,
don't care about my sustainability pledge.
Or they'll buy like a power,
it's called a PPA, power
purchasing agreement,
or they'll be a massive wind farm
or solar farm, like wherever.
- Oh.
- And then, they'll just pretend
like those electrons are being
consumed by the data center,
but in reality, they're
paying for the power here
and selling it to the grid,
and they're buying power here.
- [Lex] Yep.
- And then, another
thing is like Microsoft
quit on some of their
sustainability pledges.
Elon, what he did with Memphis
is objectively somewhat dirty,
but he is also doing it in an area
where there's a bigger natural
gas plant right next door
and like a sewer next, or not a sewer,
but like a wastewater treatment
and a garbage dump nearby.
And he's obviously made the world
a lot more clean than that
one data center is gonna do.
So, I think it's fine to some extent.
And maybe AGI solves
global warming and stuff,
(Lex laughing)
whatever it is.
This is sort of the attitude
that people at the labs have,
which is like, yeah, it's great.
We'll just use gas.
Because the race is that important.
And if we lose, that's way worse.
- I should say that I got a chance
to visit the Memphis data center.
- Oh wow.
- And it's incredible.
I visited with Elon.
Just the teams and the rate
of innovation there is insane.
My sense is that nobody's ever
done anything of this scale
and nobody has certainly
ever done anything
of this scale at the
rate that xAI is doing.
So, they're like figuring out...
And so, I was sitting
in on all these meetings
where they're brainstorming,
it's like, it's insane.
It's exciting, 'cause they're like,
they're trying to figure out
what the bottlenecks are,
how to remove the bottlenecks,
how to make sure that,
there's just so many really cool things
about putting together a data center,
'cause everything has to work.
The people that do like the CIS admin,
the machine learning, all that
is the exciting thing, so on,
but really, the people that
run everything (chuckles)
are the folks that know
the low level software
and hardware that runs everything,
the networking, all of that.
And so, you have to make sure
you have procedures that test everything.
I think they're using ethernet.
I don't know how they're
doing the networking, but-
- They're using Nvidia
Spectrum-X ethernet.
There's actually like, I think yeah,
the unsung heroes are the
cooling and electrical systems,
which are just like
(Lex chuckles)
- Exactly.
- glossed over.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- But I think one story
that maybe is like exemplifies
how insane this stuff is,
is when you're training,
you're always doing,
you're running through the model a bunch,
in the most simplistic terms,
running through the model a bunch.
And then, you're gonna exchange everything
and synchronize the weights.
So, you'll do a step,
this is like a step in model training.
And every step, your loss
goes down, hopefully.
And it doesn't always,
but in the simplest terms,
you'll be computing a lot,
and then you'll exchange.
The interesting thing is
GPU power is most of it,
networking power is some,
but it's a lot less.
So, while you're computing,
your power for your GPUs is here.
But then when you're exchanging weights,
if you're not able to
overlap communications
and compute perfectly,
there may be a time period
where your GPUs are just idle,
and you're exchanging weights
and you're like, hey,
the model's updating.
So, you're exchanging the
gradient, you do the model update,
and then you start training again.
So, the power goes...
- Mm-hmm.
- And it's super spiky.
- Yeah.
- And so, funnily enough,
when you talk about the
scale of data center power,
you can blow stuff up
so easily.
- Yeah.
- And so, Meta actually has,
accidentally opened upstream
something to code in PyTorch
where they added an operator.
And I kid you not, whoever made this,
I wanna hug the guy,
because it says PyTorch,
it's like pytorch.powerplantnoblowup
(Lex laughing)
equals zero or equal one.
(Nathan laughing)
And what it does,
what it does is amazing.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- When you're exchanging the weights,
the GP will just compute fake numbers,
so the power doesn't spike too much.
And so then, the power
plants don't blow up
because the transient
spikes screw stuff up.
- Well, that makes sense.
You have to do that kind of thing.
You have to make sure they're not idle.
Yeah, that's-
- And Elon's solution
was like, "Let me throw a
bunch of Tesla mega packs
and a few other things."
- Stabilize, yeah.
- Everyone
has different solutions,
but Meta's at least
(Lex laughing)
was publicly and openly known,
which is just like, set this operator.
And what this operator does
is it just makes the GPUs
compute nothing so that
the power doesn't spike.
- But that just tells you
how much power you're working with.
It's insane.
It's insane.
- People should just go Google
like scale, like what does X watts do?
And go through all the
scales from one watt
to a kilowatt to a megawatt,
and you look and stare at that,
and you're how high on
the list a gigawatt is,
and it's mind-blowing.
- Can you say something about the cooling?
So, I know Elon's using liquid cooling,
I believe, in all cases.
That's a new thing, right?
Most of 'em don't use liquid cooling.
Is there something interesting
to say about the cooling?
- Yeah, yeah.
So, air cooling has been
the de facto standard.
Throw a bunch of metal heat
pipes, et cetera, and fans,
and that's cooled, that's
been enough to cool it.
People have been dabbling
in water cooling.
Google's TPUs are water-cooled.
So, they've been doing
that for a few years.
But with GPUs, no one's ever done...
And no one's ever done the scale
of water cooling that Elon just did.
Now, next generation Nvidia
is for the highest end GPU,
it is mandatory water cooling.
You have to water cool it.
But Elon did it on this
current generation,
and that required a lot of stuff.
If you look at some of
the satellite photos
and stuff of the Memphis facility,
there's all these external
water chillers that are sitting,
basically, it looks like
a semi-truck pod thing.
What's it called? The container.
But really, those are water chillers.
And he has like 90 of those water chillers
just sitting outside, 90
different containers with water,
like chill the water, bring
it back to the data center,
and then you distribute
it to all the chips,
pull all the heat out,
and then send it back.
And this is both a way to cool the chips,
but it's also an efficiency thing.
And going back
to that sort of three
vector thing right there is,
there is memory bandwidth
FLOPS and interconnect.
The closer the chips are together,
the easier it is to do
high speed interconnects.
And so, this is also like a reason
why you wanna go water cooling
is because you can just put the chips
right next to each other,
and therefore get higher
speed connectivity.
- I gotta ask you, so in
one of your recent posts,
there's a section called
cluster measuring contest, so...
- There's another word there,
but I won't say it, you know.
(Dylan and Nathan laughing)
- Who's got the biggest
now and who's gonna have
the biggest?
- Today,
individual largest is Elon.
- Right. Elon's cluster.
- Elon's cluster in Memphis, 200,000 GPUs.
- Okay.
- Meta has like 128,000,
OpenAI has 100,000 now.
Now, to be clear, other companies
have more GPUs than Elon.
They just don't have 'em in one place.
And for training, you want
them tightly connected.
There's some techniques
that people are researching
and working on that lets you
train across multiple regions.
But for the most part, you
want them all in one area.
So, you can connect them
with high speed networking.
And so, Elon today has 200,000 H100s.
And 100,000 H100s, 100,000 H200s.
Meta, OpenAI, and Amazon all have
on the scale of 100,000,
a little bit less.
But this year, this year,
people are building much more.
Anthropic and Amazon
are building a cluster
of 400,000 Trainium 2, which
is Amazon-specific chip
trying to get away from Nvidia.
Meta and OpenAI have scales
for hundreds of thousands,
but by next year,
you'll have like 500,000
to 700,000 GPU clusters.
And note, those GPUs are
much higher power consumption
than existing ones.
Hopper, 700 watts, Blackwell
goes to 1,200 watts.
So, the power
per chip is growing
(Lex laughing)
and the number of chips is growing.
- Nuts. Elon said he'll get to a million.
You think that's actually feasible?
- I don't doubt Elon.
The filings that he has for the power plan
and the Tesla battery packs,
it's clear he has some
crazy plans for Memphis.
Like permits and stuff is open record.
But it's not quite clear what
and what the timescales are.
I just never doubt Elon.
He's gonna surprise us.
- So, what's the idea with these clusters?
If you have a million GPUs,
what percentage in let's say,
two, three years is used for training
and what percent of pre-training
and what percent is used
for the actual computation?
- So, these mega clusters
make no sense for inference.
You could route inference
there and just not train.
But most of the inference
capacity is being,
hey, I've got a 30-megawatt
data center here.
I've got 50 megawatts here,
I've got 100 here, whatever.
I'll just throw inference in all of those,
because the mega clusters,
multi gigawatt data centers,
I want to train there.
Because that's where all
of my GPUs are co-located,
where I can put them
at a super high networking
speed connected together.
Because that's what you need for training.
Now, with pre-training,
this is the old scale.
You would increase parameters,
you'd increase data, model gets better.
That doesn't apply anymore,
because there's not much more
data in the pre-training side.
Yes, there's video and audio and image
that has not been fully
taken advantage of.
So, there's a lot more scaling,
but a lot of people have transcript,
taken transcripts of YouTube videos,
and that gets you a lot of the data.
Doesn't get you all of the learning value
out of the video and image data,
but there's still scaling
to be done on pre-training.
But this post-training world
is where all the FLOPS are gonna be spent.
The model's gonna play with itself.
It's gonna self-play, it's
gonna do verifiable tasks,
it's gonna do computer use in sandboxes.
It might even do
simulated robotics things.
All of these things are
gonna be environments
where compute is spent in,
quote, unquote, "post-training".
But I think it's gonna be good.
We're gonna drop the
post from post-training.
- Yeah. Wow.
- It's gonna be pre-training
and it's gonna be training, I think.
At point at some,
(Dylan drowns out Nathan)
at some point.
(Nathan laughing)
Because for the bulk
of the last few years,
pre-training has dwarfed post-training.
- [Lex] Mm-hmm.
- But with these verifiable methods,
especially ones that scale really,
potentially infinitely,
like computer use and robotics,
not just math and coding,
where you can verify what's happening,
those infinitely verifiable tasks,
it seems you can spend as much
compute as you want on them.
- Especially at the
context length increase.
'Cause at the end of pre-training
is when you increase the
context length for these models.
And we've talked earlier
in the conversation
about how the context length,
when you have a long input,
is much easier to manage than output.
And a lot of these post-training
and reasoning techniques
rely on a ton of sampling
and it's becoming
increasingly long context.
So, there's just your,
effectively your compute
efficiency goes down.
I think FLOPS is the standard
for how you measure it.
But with RL and you have
to do all these things,
where you move your weights around
in a different way than at
pre-training and just generation.
It's going to be become less efficient
and FLOPS is gonna be
less of a useful term.
And then, as the
infrastructure gets better,
it's probably gonna go back to FLOPS.
- So, all of the things
we've been talking about
is most likely going to be Nvidia.
Is there any competitors?
- Google, I ignored them.
- TPU. Yeah. (chuckles)
- I was like, huh?
- Yeah,
what's the story with TPU?
Like what's the...
- TPU is awesome. It's great.
Google is, they're a bit more tepid
on building data centers for some reason.
They're building big data
centers, don't get me wrong.
And they actually have
the biggest cluster.
I was talking about Nvidia clusters,
they actually have the
biggest cluster, period.
But the way they do it
is very interesting.
They have two data center super regions
in that, the data center isn't physically
like all of the GPUs aren't
physically on one site,
but they're like 30 miles from each other.
Or not GPUs, TPUs.
They have like in Iowa and Nebraska,
they have four data centers
that are just right next to each other.
- Why doesn't Google
flex it's cluster size?
- Go to multi-datacenter training.
There's good images in there.
So, I'll show you what I mean.
It's just SemiAnalysis multi-datacenter.
So, this is an image
of what a standard Google
data center looks like.
By the way, their data
centers look very different
than anyone else's data centers.
- [Lex] What are we looking at here?
- So, these are, yeah,
so if you see this image right,
in this center, there are
these big rectangular boxes.
Those are where the actual chips are kept.
And then, if you scroll
down a little bit further,
you can see there's
like these water pipes,
there's these chiller
cooling towers in the top,
and a bunch of diesel generators.
The diesel generators are backup power.
The data center itself
look physically smaller
than the water chillers.
So, the chips are actually
easier to keep together,
but then cooling all the water
for the water cooling is very difficult.
So, Google has a very
advanced infrastructure
that no one else has for the TPU.
And what they do is they've
stamped these data center,
they've stamped a bunch
of these data centers out
in a few regions.
So, if you go a little bit further down,
this is a Microsoft, this is in Arizona.
This is where GPT-5, quote,
unquote, "will be trained".
(Lex laughing)
- [Nathan] If it doesn't exist already.
- Yeah, if it doesn't exist already.
But each of these data centers,
I've shown a couple images of them,
they're really closely co-located
in the same region, Nebraska, Iowa.
And then, they also have a
similar one in Ohio complex.
And so, these data centers are
really close to each other.
And what they've done
is they've connected them super
high bandwidth with fiber.
And so, these are just
a bunch of data centers.
And the point here is that Google
has a very advanced infrastructure,
very tightly connected in a small region.
So, Elon will always
have the biggest cluster fully connected,
because it's all in one building.
- Yeah.
- And he's completely right
on that.
Google has the biggest cluster,
but you have to spread over three sites,
and by a significant margin,
but you have to go across multiple sites.
- Why doesn't Google compete with Nvidia?
Why don't they sell TPUs?
- I think there's a
couple problems with it.
It's like one, TPU has been a form
of allowing search to
be really freaking cheap
and build models for that.
And so, a big chunk of the search,
GPU purchases or TPU purchases,
or big chunk of Google's
purchases and usage,
all of it is for internal workloads.
Whether it be Search,
now, Gemini, YouTube,
all these different
applications that they have ads,
these are where all their
TPUs are being spent,
and that's what they're hyperfocused on.
And so, there's certain
aspects of the architecture
that are optimized for their use case
that are not optimized elsewhere.
One simple one is they've
open sourced the Gemma model
and they called it Gemma 7B.
But then, it's actually
8 billion parameters
because the vocabulary is so large.
(Lex laughing)
And the reason they made
the vocabulary so large
is because TPU's
matrix-multiply unit is massive.
Because that's what they've optimized for.
And so, they decided, oh, well,
I'll just make the vocabulary large too,
even though it makes no sense
to do so in such a small model,
because that fits on their hardware.
So, Gemma doesn't run
as efficiently on a GPU as a Llama does.
But vice versa, Llama doesn't run
as efficiently on a TPU as a Gemma does.
And it's so like,
there's certain aspects of
hardware, software, co-design.
So, all their search models,
or their ranking and
recommendation models,
all these different models that are AI,
but not like GenAI,
have been hyper optimized
with TPUs forever.
The software stack is super optimized,
but all of this software stack
has not been released publicly at all.
Very small portions of
it, Jax and XLA have been.
But the experience when
you're inside of Google
and you're training on
TPUs as a researcher,
you don't need to know anything
about the hardware in many cases.
It's pretty beautiful.
- They all love it.
- But soon as you
step outside...
(Nathan chuckles)
- A lot of 'em go back. (chuckles)
They leave Google and then they go back.
- Yeah.
- Yeah.
They leave and they start a company,
'cause they have all these
amazing research ideas
and they're like, wait,
infrastructure's hard,
software is hard, and this is on GPUs.
Or if they try to use TPUs, same thing,
'cause they don't have
access to all this code.
And so, it's like, how
do you convince a company
whose Golden Goose is Search,
where they're making hundreds
of billions of dollars from,
to start selling GPU, or TPUs,
which they used to only
buy a couple billion of...
I think in 2023, they bought
like a couple billion,
and now they're buying 10
billion to $15 billion worth.
But how do you convince them
that they should just
buy like twice as many
and figure out how to sell
them, and make $30 billion?
Like, who cares about making $30 billion?
- Won't that 30 billion
exceed actually the
search profit eventually?
- You're always gonna make
more money on services
than hardware.
- Always.
- Like yeah, to be clear, today,
people are spending a lot more
on hardware than they are the services,
because the hardware
runs the service spend.
- Yeah.
- But like-
- [Lex] You're investing, yeah.
- If there's no revenue for AI stuff
or not enough revenue, then
obviously, it's gonna blow up.
People won't continue to
spend on GPUs forever.
And then, Nvidia's trying to
move up the stack with software
that they're trying to
sell and license and stuff.
But Google has never had that DNA
of this is a product we should sell.
The Google Cloud does,
which is a separate
organization from the TPU team,
which is a separate organization
from the DeepMind team,
which is a separate organization
from the Search team,
there's a lot of bureaucracy here.
- Wait, Google Cloud is a
separate team than the TPU team?
- Technically, TPU sits
under infrastructure,
which sits under Google Cloud,
but Google Cloud, for renting stuff
and TPU architecture are
very different goals.
And hardware and software,
like all of this.
The JAX, XLA teams
do not serve Google's
customers externally.
Whereas Nvidia's various CUDA teams
for things like NCCL
serve external customers.
- [Lex] Mm-hmm.
- The internal teams like
JAX and XLA and stuff,
they more so serve DeepMind
and Search.
- Yeah.
- And so, their customers' different.
They're not building a product for them.
- Do you understand why AWS keeps winning
versus Azure for cloud
versus Google Cloud?
- Yeah, there's-
- Google Cloud is tiny,
isn't it, relative to AWS?
- Google Cloud is third.
- [Nathan] Yeah, yeah.
- Microsoft is the second biggest,
but Amazon is the biggest.
- Yeah.
- And Microsoft deceptively
sort of includes Microsoft
Office 365, and things like that.
Like some of these
enterprise-wide licenses.
So, in reality, the Gulf is even larger,
Microsoft is still second though.
Amazon is way bigger. Why?
Because using AWS is better and easier.
And in many cases,
it's cheaper.
- It was first.
- And it's first.
- It was first.
- [Lex] Yeah, but there's a lot of things
that are first that-
- Well, it's easier...
It's harder to switch
than it is to-
- Yeah, okay.
- AWS is-
- Because it's large-
- There's big fees for switching too.
- AWS generates over 80%
(Nathan chuckles)
of Amazon's profit, I think over 90%.
- That's insane.
- The distribution centers
are just like, one day,
we'll decide to make money from
this, but they haven't yet.
They make tiny little profit from-
- Yeah, one day, Amazon
Prime will triple in price.
- You would think they
would improve AWS interface,
'cause it's horrible.
It's clunky, but everybody is...
(Lex laughing)
- [Nathan] I don't, yeah,
one would think.
- I think actually, Google's
interface is sometimes nice,
but it's also they don't care
about anyone besides their top customers.
- Yeah, exactly.
- And like
their customer service sucks
and they have a lot less, like...
- All these companies,
they optimize for the big customers, yeah.
It's supposed to be
for business.
- Well, and Amazon
has always optimized for the
small customer too though.
Obviously, they optimize a
lot for the big customer,
but when they started, they just would go
to like random Bay Area
things and give out credits.
And then, they like,
or just put in your
credit card and use us.
It went back in the early days.
So, they've always,
the business has grown
with them in burgeon.
So, why does Amazon, why is
Snowflake all over Amazon?
Because Snowflake, in the beginning,
when Amazon didn't care about
them, was still using Amazon.
And then, of course, one day,
Snowflake and Amazon has
a super huge partnership,
but this is the case,
like Amazon's user experience
and quality is better.
Also, a lot of the silicon
they've engineered makes them
have a lower cost structure
in traditional cloud,
storage, CPU, networking,
that kind of stuff than in databases.
I think like four of Amazon's
top five revenue products,
margin products are gross profit products,
are all database-related products
like Redshift and all these things.
So, Amazon has a very good
silicon to user experience,
entire pipeline with AWS.
I think Google, their silicon teams,
yeah, they have awesome
silicon internally,
TPU, the YouTube chip,
some of these other
chips that they've made.
And the problem is they're not
serving external customers,
they're serving internal customers.
- Nvidia's entire culture
is designed from the bottom-up to do this.
There's this recent book,
"The Nvidia Way" by Tae Kim,
that details this
and they're how they look
for future opportunities
and ready their CUDA software libraries
to make it so that new applications
of high performance computing
can very rapidly be evolved
on CUDA and Nvidia chips.
And that is entirely different
than Google as a services business.
- Yeah, Nvidia, it should be said,
is a truly special company.
There's the whole, the
culture and everything,
they're really optimized
for that kind of thing.
Speaking of which, is there somebody
that can even challenge
Nvidia hardware-wise?
Intel, AMD?
- I really don't think so.
We went through a very
long process of working
with AMD on training on their
GPU's inference and stuff.
And they're decent.
Their hardware is better in
many ways than in Nvidia's.
The problem is their
software is really bad,
and I think they're getting better,
they're getting better
faster, but they're just,
the Gulf is so large
and they don't spend enough resources on,
or haven't historically.
Maybe they're changing their tune now,
but for multiple months, we
were submitting the most bugs.
Like us, SemiAnalysis.
- Mm-hmm.
- Like what the fuck?
Why are we submitting the most bugs?
Because they only,
and they only cared about
their biggest customers.
And so, they'd ship them a
private image, blah, blah, blah.
And it's like, okay, but
I am just using PyTorch
and I wanna use the publicly
available libraries
- Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
- and you don't care
about that.
So, they're getting better.
But I think AMD's not possible.
Intel's obviously in
dire straits right now
and needs to be saved somehow.
Very important for national security,
for American technology dominance.
- Can you explain the, obviously,
so why are they in dire straits?
- Going back to earlier,
only three companies can R&D.
- Yeah.
- Taiwan, Hsinchu,
Samsung, Pyongyang, and
then Intel, Hillsboro.
Samsung's doing horribly.
Intel's doing horribly.
We could be in a world
where there's only one
company that can do R&D,
and that one company already
manufactures most of chips.
They've been gaining market share anyways.
But that's a critical thing.
So, what happens to Taiwan
means the rest of the world's
semiconductor industry,
and therefore tech, relies on Taiwan.
And that's obviously precarious.
As far as Intel, they've been
slowly, steadily declining.
They were on top of servers and PCs,
but now, Apple's done the M1
and Nvidia's releasing a PC chip,
and Qualcomm's releasing a PC chip,
and in servers, hyperscalers are all
making their own ARM-based server chips.
And Intel has no AI silicon wins.
They have very small wins.
And they never got into mobile,
because they said no to the iPhone.
And all these things have compounded
and they've lost their
process technology leadership.
They were ahead for 20 years
and now they're behind by
at least a couple years.
And they're trying to catch back up
and we'll see if their 18A,
14A strategy works out,
where they try and leapfrog TSMC.
But like...
And Intel is just losing
tons of money anyways.
And they just fired their CEO,
even though their CEO was the only person
who understood the company well.
We'll see.
He was not the best, but he
was pretty good, relatively.
Technical guy.
- [Lex] Where does Intel
make most of its money?
The CPU still, right?
- PCs
and data center CPUs, yeah.
But data center CPUs are all going Cloud
and Amazon, Microsoft, Google
are making ARM-based CPUs.
And then, PC side, AMDs
gained market share.
Nvidia's launching a chip
that's not gonna be a success.
Mediatek, Qualcomm ever launch chips.
Apple's doing well.
They could get squeezed
a little bit in PC,
although PC generally I imagine,
will just stick Intel
mostly for Windows side.
- Let's talk about the broad
AI race. Who do you think wins?
We talked about Google, Meta,
xAI.
- The default leader
has been Google because of
their infrastructure advantage.
- [Lex] Well, like in the
news, OpenAI is the leader.
- They're leading in the-
- They have the best model.
- They have the best
model that people can use.
And they're experts-
- And they have
the most AI revenue.
- Yeah. OpenAI is winning.
- So, who's making money on AI right now?
Is anyone making money?
- So, accounting profit-wise,
Microsoft is making money,
but they're spending a lot of CapEx,
and that gets depreciated over years.
Meta's making tons of money,
but with recommendation systems,
which is AI,
(Nathan chuckles)
but not with Llama.
- Right.
- Llama's losing money for sure.
I think Anthropic and OpenAI
are obviously not making money,
'cause otherwise, they
wouldn't be raising money.
They have to raise money to build more.
Although theoretically,
they are making money.
You spent a few hundred
million dollars on GPT-4,
and it's doing billions in revenue.
So, obviously, it's making money.
Although they had to continue to research
to get the compute efficiency wins,
and move down the curve
to get that 1,200x that has
been achieved for GPT-3.
Maybe we're only at a couple 100x now,
but with GPT-4 Turbo and 4o,
and there'll be another one
probably cheaper than GPT-4o even
that comes out at some point.
- And that research costs a lot of money.
- [Dylan] Yep. Exactly.
- That's the thing that I guess
is not talked about with the cost,
that when you're referring
to the cost of the model,
it's not just the
training or the test runs,
it's the actual research,
the manpower that-
- Yeah, to do things
like reasoning right now
that that exists, they're gonna scale it,
they're gonna do a lot of research still.
I think people focus on
the payback question,
but it's really easy
to just be like, well,
GDP is humans and industrial capital.
And if you can make intelligence
cheap, you can grow a lot.
That's the sort of dumb way to explain it.
But that's what basically
the investment thesis is.
I think only Nvidia is
actually making tons of money
and other hardware vendors.
The hyperscalers are all
on paper making money,
but in reality, they're
spending a lot more
on purchasing the GPUs,
which you don't know if they're still
gonna make this much money
on each GPU in two years.
You don't know if all of a
sudden, OpenAI goes kapoof,
and now Microsoft has
hundreds of thousands
of GPUs they were renting
to OpenAI that are,
that they paid for themselves
with their investment in them
that no longer have a customer.
this is always a possibility.
I don't believe that.
I think OpenAI will keep raising money.
I think others will keep raising money,
because the investments,
the returns from it
are gonna be eventually
huge once we have AGI.
- So, do you think multiple
companies will get...
Let's assume that-
- I don't think
it's winner take all.
- Okay. So, let's not
call it AGI, whatever.
It's like a single day.
It's a gradual thing.
- Powerful AI,
super powerful AI.
- But it's a gradually
increasing set of features
that are useful and make-
- [Nathan] Rapidly increasing
set of features.
- Rapidly,
rapidly increasing set of features.
So, you're saying a lot
of companies will be...
It just seems absurd that
all of these companies
are building gigantic data centers.
- There were companies
that will benefit from AI,
but not because they train the best model.
Like Meta has so many avenues
to benefit from AI and
all of their services.
People are there, people
spend time on Meta's platforms
and it's a way to make more
money per user per hour.
- Yeah it seems like
Google/xAI/Tesla, important to say,
and then Meta will benefit
not directly from the AI
like the LLMs, but from the intelligence,
like the additional boost of intelligence
to the products they already sell.
So, whether that's the
recommendation system
or for Elon who's been talking
about Optimus, the robot,
potentially the intelligence of the robot.
And then, you have personalized
robots in the home,
that kind of thing.
He thinks it's a 10 plus trillion
dollar business, which...
(Lex laughing)
- Yeah, sure.
- At some point maybe.
Not soon, but who knows
what robotics will-
- Let's do a TAM analysis.
8 billion humans
and let's get
(Nathan laughing)
8 billion robots.
And let's pay 'em the average salary,
and yeah, there we go, 10
trillion, more than 10 trillion.
- Yeah.
If there's robots everywhere,
why does it have to be
just 8 billion robots?
- Yeah, yeah,
of course, of course.
- [Lex] It could be-
- I'm gonna have one robot,
you're gonna have like 20.
- Yeah, I see a use case for that.
So, yeah, I guess the benefit
would be in the products they sell,
which is why OpenAI's in a
trickier position, 'cause they-
- All of the value of OpenAI right now
as a brand is in ChatGPT.
And there is actually
not that, for most users,
there's not that much of a reason
that they need OpenAI
to be spending billions
and billions of dollars
on the next best model,
- Mm-hmm.
- when they could
just license Llama 5,
and for be way cheaper.
So, that's like ChatGPT
is an extremely valuable
entity to them, (chuckles)
but they could make
more money just off that
than trying-
- The chat application
is clearly like, does not
have tons of room to continue.
Like the standard chat,
where you're just using it for
a random question and stuff.
The cost continues to collapse.
V3 is the latest-
- It'll go down to ads.
- Biggest, but it's gonna
get supported by ads.
Meta already serves 405b
and probably loses the
money, but at some point,
they're going to get, the
models are gonna get so cheap
that they can just serve them
for free with ads supported.
And that's what Google's
gonna be able to do.
And that's obviously
they've got a bigger reach.
So, chat is not gonna
be the only use case.
It's like these reasoning,
code, agents, computer use,
all this stuff is where OpenAI
has to actually go to
make money in the future.
Otherwise, they're kaputs.
- But X, Google, and Meta
have these other products.
So, isn't it likely that OpenAI
and Anthropic disappear eventually?
Because it's-
- Unless they're so good
at models, 'cause they are.
- [Lex] But it's such a cutting edge,
I mean, you have to get-
- It depends on where
you think AI capabilities are going.
- You have to keep winning.
- Yes.
- You have to keep winning.
As you climb,
even if the AI capabilities
are going super rapidly awesome
into the direction of
AGI, there's still a boost
for X in terms of data,
Google in terms of data,
Meta in terms of data,
in terms of other products and the money.
There's just
huge amount of money.
- But if the whole idea
is human data is tapped
out, we don't care,
we all care about
self-play verifiable tasks-
- Yes, the self-play,
- Think about AWS-
- [Lex] which is an R&D problem.
- AWS does not make a lot of money
on each individual machine.
And the same can be said for
the most powerful AI platform,
which is even though the
calls to the API are so cheap,
there's still a lot of money
to be made by owning that platform.
And there's a lot of discussions
as it's the next compute layer.
- You have to believe that...
And there's a lot of
discussions that tokens
and tokenomics and LLM APIs
are the next compute layer,
or the next paradigm for the economy,
like energy and oil was.
But there's also, you
have to believe that APIs
and chat are not where AI is stuck.
It is actually just tasks
and agents and robotics and computer use.
And those are the areas
where all the value will be delivered,
not API, not chat application.
- So, is it possible you have,
I mean, it all just becomes a commodity,
and you have the very thin
wrapper like Perplexity.
Just joking.
- [Nathan] There are a lot of wrappers
making a lot of money.
- Yeah, but do you think it's possible
that people would just
even forget what OpenAI
and Anthropic is, and just,
'cause there'll be
wrappers around the API,
and it just dynamically-
- If model progress is not rapid, yeah.
It's becoming a commodity.
DeepSeek-V3 shows this,
but also the GPT-3 chart
earlier, chart showed this.
Llama 3B is 1,200x cheaper than GPT-3.
Any GPT-3, like anyone
whose business model
was GPT-3 level capabilities is dead.
- Yeah.
- Anyone whose business model
is GPT-4 level capabilities is dead.
- It is a common saying
that the best businesses
being made now are ones
that are predicated on
models getting better.
- Right, which would be wrappers,
thing that is riding
the wave of the models.
- The short-term that company
that could make the most money
is the one that figures out
what advertising targeting method works
for language model generations.
We have the Meta ads which
are hyper targeted in feed,
not within specific pieces
- Mm-hmm.
- of content.
And we have search ads
that are used by Google
and Amazon has been
rising a lot on Search.
But within a piece, within
a return from ChatGPT,
it is not clear
how you get a high quality
placed ad within the output.
And if you can do that with
model costs coming down,
you can just get super high revenue per...
That revenue is totally untapped
and it's not clear
technically how it is done.
- Yeah, that is...
the ad sense innovation that Google did,
the one day you'll have
in GPT output an ad
and that's gonna make
billions, not-
- And it could be very subtle.
It could be in conversation.
We have voice mode now.
It could be some way of making it,
so the voice introduces certain things.
It's much harder to measure
and it takes imagination, but yeah.
- And it wouldn't come off shady,
so you would receive public
blow back, that kind of thing.
So, you have to do it loud enough
to where it's clear it's an ad
that and balance all of that.
So, that's the open question
they're trying to solve.
Anthropic and OpenAI, they need to-
- They might not say
that they-
- I don't think
they care about that at all.
- They don't care about it right now.
I think it's places
- I think they're surely-
- like Perplexity are
experimenting on that more.
- [Lex] Oh, interesting. Yeah, for sure.
- Like Perplexity, Google,
Meta care about this.
I think OpenAI and Anthropic
are purely laser-focused on-
- AGI.
- Yeah, agents and AGI.
And if I build AGI, I
can make tons of money.
Or I can spend, pay for everything.
And it is just predicated back
on the export control thing.
If you think AGI is 5,
10 years away or less,
these labs think it's 2, 3 years away.
Obviously, your actions are,
if you assume they're rational actors,
which they are mostly,
what you do in a two-year
AGI versus five-year
versus 10 years is very,
very, very different.
- Do you think agents are promising?
We have to talk about this. (chuckles)
This is like the excitement of the year
that agents are gonna rev...
This is the generic hype term
that a lot of business folks are using.
AI agents are gonna
revolutionize everything.
- Okay. So, mostly, the term
agent is obviously overblown.
We've talked a lot about
reinforcement learning
as a way to train for verifiable outcomes.
Agents should mean
something that is open-ended
and is solving a task
independently on its own,
and able to adapt to uncertainty.
There's a lot of the term agent applied
to things like Apple Intelligence,
which we still don't
have after the last WWDC,
which is orchestrating between apps.
And that type of tool
use thing is something
that language models can do really well.
Apple Intelligence I suspect will work,
so will come eventually.
It's a closed domain.
It's your messages app
integrating with your photos,
with AI in the background.
That will work.
That has been described as an agent
by a lot of software companies
to get into the narrative.
- Yeah.
- The question is what ways
can we get language models
to generalize to new domains
and solve their own problems in real time.
Maybe some tiny amount of training
when they're doing this
with fine-tuning themselves
or in context learning,
which is the idea of storing
information in a prompt.
And you can use learning
algorithms to update that.
And whether or not you believe
that that is gonna actually
generalize to things
like me saying, book my trip
to go to Austin in two days.
I have X, Y, Z constraints,
and actually trusting it.
I think there's a HCI problem
coming back for information.
- Well, what's your prediction there?
Because my gut says we're
very far away from that.
- I think OpenAI's statement,
I don't know if you've
seen the five levels.
Or it's chat is level one,
reasoning is level two, and
then agents is level three.
And I think there's a couple more levels,
but it's important to
note, we were in chat
for a couple years.
- Mm-hmm.
- We just theoretically got to reasoning.
We'll be here for a year or two.
And then, agents, but at the same time,
people can train like
approximate capabilities
of the next level,
but the agents are doing
things autonomously,
doing things for minutes at a time,
hours at a time, et cetera.
Reasoning is doing things for
tens of seconds at a time.
And then, coming back with an output
that I still need to verify
and use and try check out.
And the biggest problem is of course,
it's the same thing with manufacturing.
There's the whole six sigma thing.
How many nines do you get,
and then you compound the
nines onto each other,
and it's like if you multiply
by the number of steps that are six sigma,
you get to a yield or something.
So, like in semiconductor manufacturing,
tens of thousands of steps.
9999999 is not enough,
because you multiply that many times,
you actually end up with like 60% yield.
- Or zero.
- Really low yield. Yeah.
Or zero.
And this is the same thing with agents.
Chaining tasks together each time, LLMs,
even the best LLMs in particularly
pretty good benchmarks
don't get 100%.
- Yeah.
- They get a little bit below that,
because there is a lot of noise.
And so, how do you get to enough nines?
This is the same thing with self-driving.
We can't have self-driving
because without it being
super geofenced like Google's.
And even then, they have
a bunch of tele operators
to make sure it doesn't get stuck.
But you can't do that because
it doesn't have enough nines.
- And self-driving has
quite a lot of structure
because roads have rules.
It's well-defined. There's regulation.
When you're talking about
computer use for the open web,
for example, or the open
operating system, it's a mess.
So, the possibility, I'm always skeptical
of any system that is
tasked with interacting
with the human world,
the open message human world.
- That's the thing.
If we can't get intelligence,
that's enough to solve the
human world on its own.
We can create infrastructure
like the human operators for Waymo
- Yeah.
- over many years
that enable certain workflows.
- There is a company, I don't remember it,
but that's literally their pitches.
Yeah, we're just gonna
be the human operator
when agents fail, and you
just call us and we fix it.
- Yeah.
- It's like an API call
and it's hilarious.
- There's gonna be teleoperation markets
when we get human robots,
which is there's gonna be somebody
around the world that's
happy to fix the fact
that it can't finish loading my dishwasher
- Yeah.
- when I'm unhappy with it,
but that's just gonna be part
of the Tesla service package.
- I'm just imagining an AI agent
talking to another AI agent.
One company has an AI agent
that specializes in
helping other AI agents.
- But if you can make things
that are good at one step,
- Yeah.
- you can stack them together.
So, that's why I'm like,
if it takes a long time,
we're gonna build
infrastructure that enables it.
You see the operator launch,
they have partnerships with
certain websites, with DoorDash,
with OpenTable,
- Mm-hmm.
- with things like this.
Those partnerships are gonna
let them climb really fast.
Their model's gonna get
really good at those things.
It's gonna proof of concept
that might be a network effect
where more companies wanna
make it easier for AI.
Some companies will be like,
no, let's at put blockers in place.
- Yep.
- And this is the story
of the internet we've seen.
We see it now with training
data for language models,
where companies are like,
no, you have to pay,
- [Lex] Mm-hmm.
(Nathan chuckles)
- business working it out.
- That said, I think airlines have a very,
and hotels have high incentive
to make their site work really
well, and they usually don't.
If you look at how many clicks it takes
to order a airplane ticket, it's insane.
I don't-
- You actually
can't call an American
Airlines agent anymore.
They don't have a phone number.
- It's horrible on many, on
the interface front and all...
To imagine that agents will be able
to deal with that website,
when I, as a human, struggle,
like I have an existential crisis
every time I try to
book an airplane ticket,
that I think it's gonna be
very extremely difficult
to build a AI agent that's robust
in that way.
- But think about it,
United has accepted the Starlink term,
which is they have to
provide Starlink for free
and the users are going to love it.
What if one Airline is like,
we're gonna take a year
and we're gonna make our website
have white text that works
perfectly for the AIs.
Every time anyone asks
about an AI flight, they buy
whatever airline it is.
(Dylan laughing)
- Or they're just like, here's an API in,
it's only exposed to AI agents
and if anyone queries it,
the price is 10% higher.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- And for any flight,
but we'll let you see any of our flights
and you can just book any of them.
Here you go, agent-
- And that's-
- Then, it's, oh, and I
made 10% higher price.
Awesome.
- Yeah.
- And am I willing to say that for like,
hey, book me a flight to see Lex.
And it's like, yeah, whatever.
- Yeah, yeah.
- I think computers and real world
and the open world are
really, really messy.
But if you start defining the
problem in narrow regions,
people are gonna be able
to create very, very productive things,
and ratchet down cost massively.
Now, crazy things like
robotics in the home,
those are gonna be a lot harder to do
just like self-driving.
Because there's just a billion
different failure modes.
But agents that can navigate
a certain set of websites
and do certain sets of tasks,
or take a photo of your fridge,
or like upload your recipes,
and then it figures out what to order
from Amazon/Whole Foods food delivery.
And that's gonna be pretty
quick and easy to do, I think.
So, it's gonna be be a whole
range of business outcomes
and it's gonna be tons of optimism
around people can just figure
out ways to make money.
- To be clear, these sandboxes
already exist in research.
There are people who have built clones
of all the most popular
websites of Google, Amazon,
blah, blah, blah, to make
it so that there's...
And I mean, OpenAI probably
has them internally
to train these things.
It's the same as DeepMind's robotics team
for years has had clusters for robotics,
where you interact with
robots fully, remotely.
They just have a lab in London
and you send tasks to it,
it arrange the blocks
and you do this research.
Obviously, there's texts
there that fix stuff.
But we've turned these
cranks of automation before.
You go from sandbox to progress,
and then you add one
more domain at a time,
and generalize, I think.
In the history of NLP
and language processing,
instruction tuning and
tasks per language model
used to be one language
model did one task.
And then, in the instruction
tuning literature,
there's this point where
you start adding more
and more tasks together,
where it just starts to
generalize to every task.
And we don't know where
on this curve we are.
I think for reasoning with this RL
and verifiable domains, we're early,
but we don't know where the point is,
where you just start training
on enough domains and poof,
more domains just start working,
and you've crossed the
generalization barrier.
- Well, what do you think
about the programming context?
So, software engineering.
That's where I personally,
and I know a lot of people
interact with AI the most.
- There's a lot of fear
and angst too from current CS students,
but there's also, that is the area
where probably the most AI revenue
and productivity gains have come.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Whether it be Copilots or
Cursor, or what have you,
or just standard ChatGPT.
Like a lot of...
I know very few programmers
who don't have ChatGPT
and actually many of
them have the $200 tier
because that's what it's so good for.
I think that in that world,
we already see it like SWE-bench,
I don't know if you've
looked at the benchmark
made by some Stanford students.
I wouldn't say it's really hard,
but I wouldn't say it's easy either.
I think it takes someone
who's been through at
least a few years of CS,
or a couple years of programming
to do SWE-bench well.
And the models went from
4% to 60% in like a year.
And where are they gonna go to next year?
It's gonna be higher.
It probably won't be 100%,
'cause again, that nines
is really hard to do,
but we're gonna get to
some point, where that's,
and then we're gonna need
harder software engineering benchmarks,
and so on and so forth.
But the way that people think of it now
is it's can do code completion easy.
It can do some function generation
and I have to review it.
Great.
But really, the software
engineering agents,
I think can be done faster
sooner than any other agent,
because it is a verifiable domain.
You can always unit test or compile,
and there's many different regions
of it can inspect the
whole code base at once,
which no engineer really can.
Only the architects can really think
about this stuff,
- Mm-hmm.
- the really senior guys,
and they can define stuff,
and then the agent can execute on it.
So, I think software engineering costs
are gonna plummet like crazy.
And one interesting aspect of that
is when software engineering
costs are really low,
you get very different markets.
So, in the US, you have all
these platform SaaS companies,
Salesforce, and so on and so forth.
In China, no one uses platform SaaS.
Everyone just builds their own stack,
because software engineering
is much cheaper in China,
and partially because people,
number of STEM graduates, et cetera.
So, STEM. So, it's generally
just cheaper to do.
And so, at the same time,
code LLMs have been
adopted much less in China,
because the cost of an
engineer there is much lower.
But what happens when every
company can just invent
their own business logic
really cheaply and quickly?
You stop using platform SaaS,
you start building
custom-tailored solutions,
you change them really quickly.
Now, all of a sudden,
your business is a little bit
more efficient too potentially
because you're not dealing with the hell
that is some random
platform SaaS company stuff
not working perfectly and
having to adjust workflows,
or random business automation cases
that aren't necessarily AI-required.
It's just logic
that needs to be built
that no one has built.
All of these zings can go happen faster.
And so, I think software...
And then, the other
domain is like industrial,
chemical, mechanical engineers
suck at coding just generally.
And their tools, like
semiconductor engineers,
their tools are 20 years old.
All the tools run on XP,
including ASML lithography
tools, run on Windows XP.
And a lot of the analysis
happens in Excel.
It's just like, guys,
you guys can move 20 years forward
with all the data you have
and gathered and do a lot better.
It's just you need the engineering skills
for software engineering
to be delivered to the actual
domain expert engineer.
So, I think that's the area,
where I'm super, duper bullish
of generally AI creating value.
- The big picture
is that I don't think
it's gonna be a cliff.
- Yeah.
- We talked to,
I think a really good example
of how growth changes is
when Meta added stories.
So, Snapchat was on an exponential,
they added stories, it flatlined.
Software engineers,
then up until the right,
AI's gonna come in, it's
probably just gonna be flat.
It is not like everyone's
gonna lose their job.
It's hard because the
supply corrects more slowly.
So, the amount of
students is still growing
and that'll correct on a
multi-year, like a year delay,
but the amount of jobs will just turn,
and then maybe in 20, 40
years, it'll be well down.
But in the few years,
there'll never gonna be the snap moment,
where it's like software
engineers aren't useful.
- I think also the nature
of what it means to be a programmer
and what kind of jobs
programmers do changes,
'cause I think there needs
to be a human in the loop of
everything you've talked about.
There's a really important human
in that picture of correcting the code,
like fix-
- Think more
than the context length.
- Yep.
And debugging also,
like debugging by sort
of reading the code,
understanding the steering
the system, like no, no, no.
You missed the point.
Adding more to the prompt.
Kind of like, yes, adding the human-
- Designing the perfect Google button.
Google's famous for having
people design buttons
that are so perfect, and it's
like how is AI gonna do that?
Is like they could give you all the ideas.
Perfect. Fine.
- Yeah.
- That's the thing, you can call it taste.
One thing humans can do is figure out
what other humans enjoy
better than AI systems.
That's where the preference,
you loading that in.
But ultimately,
humans are the greatest
preference generat...
That's where the preference comes from.
- And humans are actually
very good at reading
or judging between two things versus,
this goes back to the core
of what RLHF and preference tuning is,
is that it's hard
to generate a good answer
for a lot of problems,
but it's easy to see which one is better.
And that's how we're
using humans for AI now
is judging which one is better.
And that's what software
engineering could look like,
is the PR review, here's a
few options, what are the,
like here are some
potential pros and cons,
and they're gonna be judges.
- I think the thing I
would very much recommend
is people start,
programmers start using AI,
and embracing that role of the
supervisor of the AI system,
and partner the AI system
versus, writing from scratch
or not learning coding at all
and just generating stuff.
Because I think there actually
has to be a pretty high level
of expertise as a programmer
to be able to manage
increasingly intelligent systems.
- I think it's that,
and then becoming a domain
expert in something.
- Sure. Yeah.
- Right?
Because seriously, if
you go look at aerospace
or semiconductors or chemical engineering,
everyone is using really crappy platforms,
really old software.
The job of a data sciences
is like a joke in many cases.
In many cases, it's very real,
but it's like bring what the forefront
of human capabilities are to your domain.
And even if the forefront is from the AI,
your domain, you're like at the forefront.
So, it's like you have to be
at the forefront of something,
and then leverage the like rising tide
that is AI for everything else.
- Oh, yeah.
There's so many low-hanging
fruit everywhere
in terms of where software
can help automate a thing
or digitize a thing.
In the legal system...
That's why Doge is exciting.
I got to hang out
with a bunch of the
Doge folks, and they...
(Lex chuckles)
I mean, government is so old school,
it's like begging for the
modernization of software,
of organizing the data,
all this kind of stuff.
In that case, it's by design,
because bureaucracy protects
centers of power, and so on.
But software breaks down those barriers,
so it hurts those that
are holding onto power,
but ultimately, benefits humanity.
So, there's a bunch of
domains of that kind.
One thing we didn't fully finish
talking about is open source.
So, first of all, congrats,
you released a new model.
- Yeah. This is the-
- Tulu. (chuckles)
- I'll explain what a Tulu is.
- Yeah.
- A tulu is a hybrid camel
when you breed a Dromedary
with a Bactrian camel.
Back in the early days, after
ChatGPT, there was a big wave
of models coming out like
Alpaca, Vicuna, et cetera,
that were all named after
various mammalian species.
So, Tulu is the brand
is multiple years old,
which comes from that.
- Mm-hmm.
- And we've been playing at the frontiers
of post-training with open source code.
And this first part of this
release was in the fall,
where we've built on Llama's open models,
open-weight models,
and then we add in our fully
open code, our fully open data.
There's a popular benchmark
that is chat bot arena.
And that's generally the metric
by which how these chat
models are evaluated.
And it's humans compare random models
from different organizations.
And if you looked at the leaderboard
in November or December,
among the top 60 models from
10s to 20s of organizations,
none of them had open code or
data for just post-training.
Among that, even fewer
or none have pre-training
data and code available.
But it's like post-training
is much more accessible at this time.
It's still pretty cheap and you can do it.
And the thing is how high
can we push this number,
where people have access
to all the code and data.
So, that's the motivation of the project.
We draw in lessons from Llama.
Nvidia had a Nemotron model,
where the recipe for their post-training
was fairly open with
some data and a paper.
And it's putting all these together to try
to create a recipe that people
can fine-tune models like
GPT-4 to their domain.
- So, to be clear, in the case of Tulu,
maybe you can talk about OLMO 2,
but in the case of Tulu,
you're taking Llama 3, 4, 5B.
- Tulu has been a series of
recipes for post-training.
So, we've done
- Okay.
- multiple models over years.
- Okay.
And so, you're open sourcing everything.
- Yeah, if you start with
an open-weight-based model,
the whole model technically
isn't open source,
because you don't know
what Llama put into it,
which is why we have a separate
thing that we'll get to.
But it's just getting
parts of the pipeline,
where people can zoom in and customize.
I know I hear from
startups and businesses,
they're like, okay, I can
take this post-training
and try to apply it to my domain.
We talk about verifiers a lot.
We use this idea which
is reinforcement learning
with verifiable rewards,
RLVR, similar to RLHF.
And we applied it to map.
And the model today,
which is we applied it
to the Llama 405b base
model from last year.
And we have our other stuff,
we have our instruction tuning
and our preference tuning.
But the math thing is interesting,
which is it's easier to
improve this math benchmark.
There's a benchmark,
M-A-T-H, MATH, all capitals,
tough name when the benchmark,
its name is the area
that you're evaluating.
We're researchers, we're not
brands, brand strategists.
And this is something
that the DeepSeek paper
talked about as well
is at this bigger model,
it's easier to elicit
powerful capabilities
with this RL training.
And then, they distill it down
from that big model to the small model.
And this model we released
today, we saw the same thing,
is we're AI2, we don't
have a ton of compute,
we can't train 405b models all the time.
So, we just did a few runs
and they tend to work,
and it's like, it just shows
that there's a lot of room
for people to play in these things.
And that's-
- And they crushed Llama's
actual release.
They're way better than it.
- Yeah.
So, our eval numbers, we
have extra months in this,
but our eval numbers are much better
than the Llama instruct model
- Mm-hmm.
- that they released.
- And then, you also said
better than DeepSeek-V3.
- Yeah. On our eval benchmark.
The most DeepSeek-V3 is really similar.
We have a safety benchmark to understand
if it will say harmful
things and things like that.
And that's what draws
down most of the way.
It's still like-
- It's like an amalgamation
of multiple benchmarks
or what do you mean?
- Yeah, so we have a 10 evaluat...
This is standard practice in post-training
is you choose your
evaluations you care about.
In academics, in smaller labs,
you'll have fewer evaluations.
In companies, you'll have a really
one domain that you really care about.
In Frontier Labs, you'll have 10s to 20s,
to maybe even 100 valuations
of specific things.
So, we'd choose a
representative suite of things
that look like chat, precise
instruction following,
which is like respond only in emojis,
just model follow weird things like that.
- Yeah.
- Math, code.
And you create a suite like this.
So, safety would be 1 of
10 in that type of suite,
where you have like,
what is the broader
community of AI care about?
And for example, in
comparison to DeepSeek,
it would be something
like our average eval for
our model would be 80,
including safety and similar without.
And DeepSeek would be like 79%
average score without safety
and their safety score would bring it down
to like 76-
- Oh, so you beat them
even ignoring safety?
- Yeah.
So, this is something that internally,
it's like I don't want to win
only by how you shape the eval benchmark.
So, if there's something
that's like people may
or may not care about
safety in their model,
safety can come downstream,
safety can be when you
host the model for an API,
safety is addressed
in a spectrum of locations
in AI applications.
So, it's like,
if you wanna say that
you have the best recipe,
you can't just gauge it on these things
that some people might not want.
- [Lex] Mm-hmm.
- And this is just, it's
like the time of progress.
We benefit if we can release model later,
we have more time to learn new techniques.
Like this RL technique, we
had started this in the fall.
It's now really popular reasoning models.
The next thing to do for
open source post-training
is to scale up verifiers,
to scale up data to replicate
some of DeepSeek's results.
And it's awesome that
we have a paper to draw
and that it makes it a lot easier.
And that's the type of things
that is going on among academic
and closed frontier research in AI.
- Since you're pushing open source,
what do you think is the future of it?
Do you think DeepSeek
actually changes things
since it's open source or open-weight
or is pushing the open source movement
into the open direction?
- This goes very back to
the license discussion.
So, DeepSeek-R1 with a friendly
license is a major reset.
So, it's like the first time
that we've had a really
clear frontier model
that is open-weights
and with a commercially friendly license
with no restrictions on
downstream use cases,
synthetic data, distillation, whatever.
This has never been the case at all
in the history of AI in the
last few years since ChatGPT.
There have been models
that are off the frontier
or models with weird licenses
that you can't really use them.
- So, isn't Meta's license
pretty much permissible
except for five companies?
And there's also...
So, this goes to what open
source AI is, which is,
there's also use case
restrictions in the Llama license,
which says you can't use
it for specific things.
So, if you come from an open
source software background,
you would say that that is
not an open source license.
- What kind of things are those though?
Are they like...
- At this point, I can't pull
them off the top of my head.
But it'll be like-
- Like stuff like competitor,
probably.
- It used to be
military use was one,
- Oh-
- and they removed that for scale.
It'll be like CSAM, like
child abuse material
or that's the type of thing
that is forbidden there.
But that's enough from
an open source background
to say it's not open source license.
And also, the Llama license
has this horrible thing,
where you have to name your
model Llama if you touch it
to the Llama model.
- Mm-hmm.
- So, it's like the branding thing.
So, if a company uses Llama, technically,
the license says that they
should say built with Llama
at the bottom of their application.
And from a marketing
perspective, that just hurts.
I can suck it up as a researcher,
I'm like, oh, it's fine.
It says Llama dash on all of
our materials for this release.
But this is why we need truly open models,
which is we don't know
DeepSeek-R1's data, but-
- Wait, so you're saying I
can't make a cheap copy of Llama
and pretend it's mine,
but I can do this with the Chinese model?
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Yeah.
- Hell yeah.
(Nathan and Dylan laughing)
- That's what I'm saying.
- Yeah.
- And that's why it's like we want to,
this whole open language
models thing, the OLMO thing,
is to try to keep the model
where everything is open
with the data as close to
the frontier as possible.
So, we're compute-constrained,
we're personnel-constrained.
We rely on getting insights from people
like John Schulman tells
us to do RL on outputs.
We can make these big jumps,
but it just takes a long time
to push the frontier of open source.
And fundamentally, I would say
that that's because open source AI
does not have the same feedback loops
as open source software.
We talked about open source
software for security
also is just because
you build something once
and you can reuse it.
If you go into a new company,
there's so many benefits.
But if you open source a language model,
you have this data sitting around,
you have this training
code, it's not that easy
for someone to come and
build on and improve,
'cause you need to spend a lot on compute.
You need to have expertise.
So, until there are feedback
loops of open source AI,
it seems mostly an ideological mission.
Like people like Mark
Zuckerberg, which is like,
America needs this, and I agree with him,
but in the time where the
motivation ideologically is high,
we need to capitalize
and build this ecosystem
around what benefits
do you get from seeing
the language model data?
And there's not a lot about that.
We're gonna try to launch a demo soon
where you can look at a
OLMO model and a query,
and see what pre-training
data is similar to it,
which is legally risky and complicated,
but it's like, what does it mean
to see the data that
the AI was trained on?
It's hard to parse.
It's terabytes of files.
It's like, I don't know what
I'm gonna find in there.
But that's what we need
to do as an ecosystem
if people want open source
AI to be financially useful.
- We didn't really talk about Stargate.
I would love to get your opinion
on what the new administration,
the Trump administration,
everything that's doing
that's being done from the America side
and supporting AI infrastructure
and the efforts of the
different AI companies.
What do you think about Stargate?
What are we supposed to
think about Stargate?
And does Sam have the money?
(Nathan chuckles)
- Yeah,
so I think Stargate is a opaque thing.
It definitely doesn't have $500 billion,
doesn't even have $100 billion.
So, what they announced is
this $500 billion number,
Larry Ellison, Sam
Altman, and Trump said it.
They thanked Trump
and Trump did do some executive actions
that do significantly improve the ability
for this to be built faster.
One of the executive actions
you did is on federal land,
you can just basically
build data centers in power,
pretty much like that.
- Mm-hmm.
- And then, the permitting
process is basically gone
or you file after the fact.
So, one of the, again,
like I had a schizo take
earlier, another schizo take,
if you've ever been to the
Presidio in San Francisco,
beautiful area, you
could build a power plant
and a data center there if you wanted to.
Because it is federal land.
(Nathan laughing)
It used to be a military base, so.
- It did.
- But obviously,
this would piss people off.
It's a good bit. Anyways.
(Nathan and Lex laughing)
Trump has made it much
easier to do this generally.
Texas has the only unregulated
grid in the nation as well.
- [Lex] Let's go, Texas.
- And so, therefore,
like ERCOT enables people
to build faster as well.
In addition, the federal
regulations are coming down.
And so, Stargate is predicated,
and this is why that whole show happened.
Now, how they came up
with a $500 billion number is beyond me.
How they came up with $100 billion number
makes sense to some extent.
And there's actually a good table in here
that I would like to show in
that Stargate piece that I had.
It's the most recent one. Yeah.
So, anyways, Stargate, it's basically,
it's a table about cost.
There, you passed it
already. It's that one.
So, this table is explaining what happens.
So, Stargate is in Abilene, Texas,
the first $100 billion of it.
That site is 2.2 gigawatts of power in,
about 1.8 gigawatts of power consumed.
Per GPU, they have like roughly...
Oracle is already building
the first part of this
before Stargate came about.
To be clear, they've been
building it for a year.
They tried to rent it to Elon, in fact.
But Elon was like, it's
too slow, I need it faster.
So, then he went
and did his Memphis thing.
- Mm-hmm.
- And so, OpenAI was able to get it
with this weird joint
venture called Stargate.
They initially signed
a deal with just Oracle
for the first section of this cluster.
This first section of this cluster
is roughly $5 billion to
$6 billion of server spend.
And then, there's another billion or so
of data center spend.
And then, likewise,
if you fill out that entire 1.8 gigawatts
with the next two generations
of Nvidia's chips,
GB200, GB300, VR200, and
you fill it out completely,
that ends up being roughly
$50 billion of server cost.
Plus there's data center
cost, plus maintenance cost,
plus operation costs,
plus all these things.
And that's where OpenAI
gets to their $100 billion
announcement that they had.
Because they talked about
100 billion is phase one.
That's this Abilene, Texas data center.
$100 billion of "total cost
of ownership", quote, unquote.
So, it's not CapEx, it's not investment,
it's $100 billion of
total cost of ownership.
And then, there will be future phases.
They're looking at other sites
that are even bigger than this
2.2 gigawatts, by the way,
in Texas and elsewhere.
And so, they're not
completely ignoring that.
But there is, the number of $100 billion
that they say is for phase one,
which I do think will happen.
They don't even have the money for that.
Furthermore, it's not $100 billion,
it's $50 billion of spend.
And then, $50 billion of
operational cost, power, et cetera,
rental pricing, et cetera.
'Cause OpenAI is renting the GPUs
from the Stargate joint venture.
What money do they
actually have? SoftBank.
SoftBank is gonna invest,
Oracle's gonna invest,
OpenAI is gonna invest.
OpenAI is on the line
- Mm-hmm.
- for $19 billion.
Everyone knows that
they've only got 6 billion
in their last round and 4 billion in debt.
But there's news of SoftBank
maybe investing 25 billion into OpenAI.
So, that's part of it.
So, 19 billion can come from there.
So, OpenAI does not have the
money at all, to be clear.
Ink is not dried on anything.
OpenAI has $0
- Yeah.
- for this 50 billion.
And which they're legally obligated
to put 19 billion of CapEx
or into the joint venture.
And then, the rest, they're gonna pay
via renting the GPUs
from the joint venture.
And then, there's Oracle.
Oracle has a lot of money.
They're building the
first section completely.
They were spending for it themselves.
This $6 billion of CapEx,
$10 billion of TCO.
And they were gonna do that first section.
They're paying for that.
As far as the rest of the section,
I don't know how much
Larry wants to spend.
At any point, he could pull out.
This is, again, this is
completely voluntary.
So, at any point,
there's no signed ink on this.
- Mm-hmm.
- But he potentially
could contribute tens of
billions of dollars, to be clear.
He's got the money,
Oracle's got the money.
And then, there's like MGX,
which is the south, the UAE fund,
which technically has $1.5
trillion for investing in AI.
But again, I don't know
how real that money is.
And whereas there's no
ink signed for this,
SoftBank does not have
$25 billion of cash.
They have to sell down their stake in Arm,
which is the leader in
CPUs, and they IPO'ed it.
This is obviously what
they've always wanted to do.
They just didn't know where
they'd redeploy the capital.
Selling down the stake in
Arm makes a ton of sense.
So, they can sell that down
and invest in this if they want to
and invest in OpenAI if they want to.
As far as money secured,
the first 100,000 GB200
cluster can be funded.
Everything else after that
- Up in the air.
- is up in the air.
Money's coming.
I believe the money will come.
I personally do.
(Lex laughing)
- It's a belief. Okay.
- It's a belief
that they are gonna release better models
and be able to raise more money,
right?
- Yeah, yeah.
But the actual reality
is, is that Elon's right,
the money does not exist.
- What is the US government
have to do with anything?
What does Trump have
to do with everything?
He's just a hype man?
- So, Trump is,
he's reducing the regulation
so they can build it faster.
And he is allowing them to do it.
Because any investment of this side
is gonna involve antitrust stuff.
So, obviously, he's gonna
allow them to do it.
He's gonna enable the regulations
to actually allow to be built.
I don't believe there's
any US government dollars
being spent on this though.
- Yeah.
So, I think he's also just
creating a general vibe
that this regulation will go down
and this is the era of building.
So, if you're a builder,
- Yeah.
- you want to create stuff,
you wanna launch stuff,
this is the time to do it.
- And so, we've had this
1.8 gigawatt data center
in our data for over a year now,
and we've been sending
it to all of our clients,
including many of these companies
that are building the multi gigawatts.
But that is at a level that's not quite,
maybe executives seeing
$500 billion, $100 billion,
and then everyone's asking them like...
So, it could spur another,
an even faster arms race.
Because there's already an arms race,
but this like 100 billion,
$500 billion number, Trump
talking about it on TV.
It could spur the arm
race to be even faster
and more investors to flood
in and et cetera, et cetera.
So, I think you're right
in that sense that OpenAI,
or Trump is championing
people are gonna build more
and his actions are gonna
let people build more.
- What are you excited
about these several
years that are upcoming
in terms of cluster build outs,
in terms of breakthroughs in AI?
Like the best possible
future you can imagine
in the next couple years,
two, three, four years?
What does that look like?
Just it could be very
specific technical things
like breakthroughs on post post-training,
or it could be just size big.
- [Dylan] Yeah, I mean it's-
- Impressive clusters.
- I really enjoy tracking supply chain
and who's involved in what.
(Lex laughing)
- Yeah.
- I really do.
It's really fun to see
the numbers, the cost,
who's building what capacity,
helping them figure out how
much capacity they should build,
winning deals, strategic
stuff, that's really cool.
I think technologically, there's a lot
around the networking side
that really excites me
with optics and electronics
getting closer and closer,
whether it be co-packaged optics,
or some sort of forms of
new forms of switching.
- This is internal
to a cluster.
- Cluster. Yeah.
Also multi-data center training,
people are putting so much
fiber between these data centers
and lighting it up with so much
bandwidth that there's a lot
of interesting stuff
happening on that end.
Telecom has been really boring since 5G,
and now it's like really
exciting again on the fiber side.
- Can you educate me a little
bit about the speed of things?
So, the speed of memory versus
the speed of interconnect,
versus the speed of fiber
between data centers?
Are these orders of magnitude different?
Can we, at some point,
converge towards a place,
where it all just feels like one computer?
- No, I don't think
that's possible.
- Okay. All right. (chuckles)
- It's only gonna get harder to program,
not easier.
- Okay.
- It's only gonna get more difficult
and complicated in more layers.
The general image that people
like to have is this hierarchy of memory.
So, on chip is really close.
Localized within the
chip, you have registers.
And those are shared between
some compute elements,
and then you'll have caches,
which are shared between
more compute elements.
Then, you have memory, like HBM or DRAM,
like DDR memory or whatever it is.
And that's shared between the whole chip.
And then, you can have pools of memory
that are shared between many chips.
And then, storage and you keep zoning out.
The access latency across data centers,
across within the data
center within a chip differs.
So, you're obviously always,
you're always gonna have different
programming paradigms for this.
It's not gonna be easy.
Programming this stuff is gonna be hard.
Maybe AI can help with programming this.
But the way to think
about it is that like,
(Dylan sighs)
there's the more elements
you add to a task,
you don't gain, you
don't get strong scaling.
If I double the number of chips,
I don't get 2x the performance.
This is just like a reality of computing,
'cause there's inefficiencies.
And there's a lot of interesting work
being done to make it more linear.
Whether it's making the chips
more networked together more tightly
or cool programming models,
or cool algorithmic things
that you can do on the model side.
DeepSeek did some of these
really cool innovations
because they were limited on interconnect,
but they still needed to parallelize.
All sorts of...
Everyone's always doing stuff.
Google's got a bunch of work
and everyone's got a
bunch of work about this.
That stuff is super exciting
on the model and workload
and innovation side.
Hardware, solid-state transformers
are interesting for the power side.
There's all sorts of stuff on batteries
and there's all sorts of stuff on...
I think when you look at,
if you look at every layer
of the compute stack,
whether it goes from lithography and etch,
all the way to like
fabrication, to optics,
to networking, to power, to transformers,
to cooling, to a networking
and you just go on up and
up and up and up the stack.
Even air conditioners for
data centers are innovating.
There's like copper cables are innovating.
You wouldn't think it,
but copper cables are,
there's some innovations happening there
with the density of how you can pack them.
And it's like all of
these layers of the stack,
all the way up to the models.
Human progress is at a pace
that's never been seen before.
- I'm just imagining you sitting
back in a layer somewhere
with screens everywhere, just
monitoring the supply chain
where all these clusters,
all the information you're gathering.
You do incredible-
- There's a big team.
There's a big team.
- Yeah. (laughs)
You do quite incredible
work with SemiAnalysis.
Just keeping your finger on the pulse
of human civilization
in the digital world.
It's pretty cool just to watch, feel that.
- [Dylan] Yeah. Thank you, I guess-
- Feel all of us doing shit, epic shit.
- [Dylan] Feel the AGI.
(Lex laughing)
- From meme to reality.
What Nathan, is there breakthroughs
that you're looking
forward to potentially?
- I had a while to think
about this while listening
to Dylan's beautiful response.
(Dylan laughing)
- He did listen to me. He was so-
- No, I knew this was coming.
And it's like, realistically,
training models is very fun
because there's so much low-hanging fruit.
And the thing that makes
my job entertaining,
I train models, I write analysis
about what's happening
with models, and it's fun
because there is obviously so
much more progress to be had.
And the real motivation why I do this
somewhere where I can share
things is that there's just,
I don't trust people that are like,
"Trust me, bro, we're gonna make AI good."
It's like we're the ones that
it's like, we're gonna do it
and you can trust us and we're
just gonna have all the AI,
and it's just I would like a future,
where more people have a say
in what AI is and can understand it.
And it's a little bit less fun,
that it's not a like
positive thing of like,
this is just all really fun.
Training models is fun and
bring people in is fun,
but it's really like AI, if it is going
to be the most powerful
technology of my lifetime,
it's like, we need to have
a lot of people involved
in making that and...
- Making it open
(Nathan chuckles)
helps with that,
as successful as possible,
as open as possible, yeah.
- In my read of the last few years
is that more openness
would help the AI ecosystem
in terms of having more people
understand what's going on,
whether that's researchers
from non-AI fields
to governments, to everything.
It doesn't mean that openness
will always be the answer.
I think then it'll reassess of like,
what is the biggest problem facing AI
and tack on a different angle
to the wild ride that we're on.
- And for me, just from
even the user experience,
anytime you have the, like Karpathy said,
the aha moments, like the magic,
like seeing the reasoning,
the chain of thought,
it's like there's something really
just fundamentally beautiful about that.
It's putting a mirror to ourselves
and seeing like, oh shit.
It is solving intelligence
as the cliche goal of these companies is.
And you get to understand
why we humans are special.
The intelligence within us is special.
And for now also, why
we're special in terms of,
we seem to be conscious in
the AI systems for now aren't,
and we get to solve, we get
to explore that mystery.
So, it's just really cool
to get to explore these
questions that I don't think,
I would've never imagined
would be even possible
back when sort of just
watching with excitement
the Deep Blue beat Kasparov.
I wouldn't have ever thought
this kind of AI would be
possible in my lifetime.
It's like this is really feels like AI.
- Yeah. (chuckles)
- It's incredible.
- I started with AI of learning
to fly a silly quadrotor.
It's like learning to fly
and it just like, it learned to fly up,
it would hit the ceiling
and stop and catch it.
It's like, okay,
that is really stupid compared
to what's going on now.
- And now, you could probably,
with natural language,
tell it to learn to fly
and it's going to generate
the control algorithm
required to do that. (laughs)
- Probably.
There's low level blockers.
We have to do some weird stuff for that,
- Yeah, for sure.
- but you can,
you definitely can.
- It's back
to our robotics conversation, yeah.
When you have to interact
in the actual physical world, that's hard.
What gives you hope about the
future of human civilization?
Looking into the next 10
years, 100 years, 1,000 years,
how long you think we'll make it?
You think we've got
1,000 years?
- I think humans
will definitely be around in 1,000 years.
I think there's ways that
very bad things could happen.
There'll be way fewer humans,
but humans are very good at surviving.
There's been a lot of
things that that is true.
I don't think they're necessarily,
we're good at long-term
credit assignment of risk,
but when the risk becomes immediate,
we tend to figure things out,
- Oh yeah.
- and for that reason,
I am like, there's physical constraints
to things like AGI hyper,
like recursive improvement
to kill us all type stuff
for physical reasons,
and for how humans have
figured things out before,
I'm not too worried about it.
AI takeover.
There are other international
things that are worrying,
but there's just
fundamental human goodness
and trying to amplify that,
and we're on a tenuous time.
And if you look at humanity as a whole,
there's been times where
things go backwards,
there's times when things
don't happen at all.
And we're on a,
what should be very positive
trajectory right now.
- Yeah, there seems to be
progress, but just with power,
there's spikes of human suffering,
and we wanna try to minimize
the amount of spikes.
- Generally, humanity is
gonna suffer a lot less.
I'm very optimistic about that.
I do worry of techno
fascism type stuff arising
as AI becomes more and more
prevalent and powerful,
and those who control
it can do more and more.
Maybe it doesn't kill us all,
but at some point, every
very powerful human
is gonna wanna brain computer interface,
so that they can interact with the AGI,
and all of its advantages
in many more way,
and merge its mind with sort of like,
and its capabilities or
that person's capabilities
can leverage those much
better than anyone else,
and therefore be, it won't
be one person rule them all,
but it will be...
The thing I worry about is
it'll be like few people,
hundreds, thousands, tens of thousands,
maybe millions of people
rule whoever's left,
and the economy around it.
And that's the thing that's
probably more worrisome
is human machine amalgamations.
This enables an individual human
to have more impact on the world.
And that impact can be
both positive and negative.
Generally, humans have
positive impacts on the world,
at least societally,
but it's possible for individual humans
to have such negative impacts.
And AGI, at least as I
think the labs define it,
which is not a runaway sentient thing,
but rather just something
that can do a lot
of tasks really efficiently,
amplifies the capabilities
of someone causing extreme damage.
But for the most part,
I think it'll be used for
profit-seeking motives,
which will increase the
abundance and supply of things.
and therefore reduce suffering.
(Lex laughing)
- Yeah.
- That's the goal.
- Scrolling on a timeline,
(Nathan laughing)
just drowning in dopamine-
- Crawling stasis.
- That is-
- Scrolling holds
the status quo of the world.
- That is a positive outcome
(Nathan and Lex laughing)
is like, if I have food tubes
- Yeah.
- and I'm scrolling and I'm happy,
that's a positive outcome.
(group laughing)
- While expanding out into the cosmos.
Well, this is a fun time to be alive.
And thank you for pushing the forefront
of what is possible in humans.
And thank you for talking
today. This was fun.
- Thanks for having us.
- Thanks for having us.
- Thanks for listening
to this conversation with
Dylan Patel and Nathan Lambert.
To support this podcast,
please check out our
sponsors in the description.
And now, let me leave you some
words from Richard Feynman.
"For a successful technology,
reality must take precedence
over public relations, for
nature cannot be fooled."
Thank you for listening and
hope to see you next time.

- The following is a conversation
with Elon Musk, DJ Seo,
Matthew MacDougall, Bliss
Chapman, and Nolan Arbaugh
about Neuralink and
the future of humanity.
Elon, DJ, Matthew and
Bliss are of course part
of the amazing Neuralink team,
and Noland is the first human
to have a Neuralink device
implanted in his brain.
I speak with each of them individually,
so use timestamps to jump around,
or as I recommend, go hardcore
and listen to the whole thing.
This is the longest
podcast I've ever done.
It's a fascinating, super technical,
and wide-ranging conversation,
and I loved every minute of it.
And now, dear friends, here's Elon Musk,
his fifth time on this,
"The Lex Fridman Podcast."
- Drinking coffee or water?
- Water.
I'm so over-caffeinated right now.
Do you want some caffeine?
- I mean, sure.
- There's a Nitro drink.
- This supposed to keep you up till like
tomorrow afternoon basically. (laughs)
- Yeah.
I don't have any-
- So what is Nitro?
It's just got a lot of
caffeine or something?
- Don't ask questions.
It's called Nitro.
- Do you need to know anything else?
- It's got nitrogen, that's ridiculous.
I mean, what we breathe
is 78% nitrogen anyway.
What do you need to add more for? (laughs)
- [Speaker] Unfortunately,
you're gonna need it.
- Most people think that
they're breathing oxygen,
and they're actually
breathing 78% nitrogen.
You need like a milk bar.
- Milk bar.
(Elon laughing)
- Like from Clockwork Orange. (laughs)
- Yeah, yeah.
Is that top three Kubrick film for you?
- Clockwork Orange, it's pretty good.
I mean, it's demented.
Jarring, I'd say.
- (laughs) Okay.
Okay, so first let's step back
and big congrats on getting Neuralink
implanted into a human.
That's a historic step for Neuralink.
- Oh, thanks, yeah.
- There's many more to come.
- Yeah, and we just, obviously,
our second implant as well.
- [Lex] How did that go?
- So far, so good.
Looks like we've got,
I think over 400 electrodes
that are providing signals.
So yeah.
- Nice.
How quickly do you think the number
of human participants will scale?
- It depends on the regulatory approval,
the rate which we get
regulatory approvals.
So we're hoping to do 10
by the end of this year.
Total of 10, so eight more.
- And with each one,
you're gonna be learning
a lot of lessons about the
new biology, the brain,
everything, the whole
chain of the Neuralink,
the decoding, the signal
processing, all that kind of stuff.
- Yeah, yeah, I think it's
obviously gonna get better
with each one.
I mean, I don't wanna jinx it,
but it seems to have gone extremely well
with the second implant,
so there's a lot of signal,
a lot of electrodes.
It's working very well.
- What improvements do you think we'll see
in Neuralink in the coming, let's say,
let's get crazy, the coming years?
- I mean, in years,
it's gonna be gigantic,
because we'll increase the number
of electrodes dramatically.
We'll improve the signal processing.
Even with only roughly,
I don't know, 10, 15%
of the electrodes working with Noland,
with our first patient,
we were able to get to
achieve a bit per second.
That's twice the world record.
So I think we'll start
like vastly exceeding
world record by orders of
magnitude in the years to come.
So it's start getting to, I don't know,
a hundred bits per second thousand.
Maybe if like five years from
now, we might be at a megabit,
like faster than any human
could possibly communicate
by typing or speaking.
- Yeah, that BPS is an
interesting metric to measure.
There might be a big leap
in the experience once you
reach a certain level of BPS.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- Like entire new ways of interacting
with a computer might be unlocked.
- And with humans.
- With other humans.
- Provided they have (laughs),
they want a Neuralink too.
- Right.
- Otherwise, they won't be able to absorb
the signals fast enough.
- Do you think they'll improve the quality
of intellectual discourse?
- Well, I think you could think of it,
if you were to slow down communication,
how do you feel about that?
If you'd only talk at, let's say,
1/10th of normal speed, you'd be like,
"Wow, that's agonizingly slow."
- [Lex] Yeah.
- So now, imagine you could speak,
communicate clearly at 10 or 100
or 1,000 times faster than normal.
- Listen, I'm pretty sure
nobody in their right mind
listens to me at 1x, they listen at 2x.
(Elon laughs)
I can only imagine what
10x would feel like
or could actually understand it.
- I usually default to 1.5x.
You can do 2x, but well, actually,
if I'm listening to somebody
in like sort of 15, 20 minutes
segments to go to sleep,
then I'll do it 1.5x.
If I'm paying attention,
I'll do 2x. (laughs)
- Right.
- But actually, if you start
actually listen to podcasts
or sort of audio books or anything,
if you get used to doing it at 1.5,
then one sounds painfully slow.
- I'm still holding onto
one because I'm afraid.
I'm afraid of myself becoming
bored with the reality,
with the real world where
everyone's speaking on 1x.
(both laughing)
- Well, depends on the person.
You can speak very fast.
Like we can communicate very quickly.
And also, if you use a wide range of,
if your vocabulary is
larger, your bit rate,
effective bit rate is higher.
- That's a good way to put it.
- Yeah.
- The effective bit rate.
I mean, that is the question
is how much information
is actually compressed in the
low bit transfer of language.
- Yeah.
If there's a single word
that is able to convey
something that would normally require,
I don't know, 10 simple words,
then you've got maybe a 10x
compression on your hands.
And that's really, like with memes,
memes are like data compression.
It conveys a whole,
you're simultaneously
hit with a wide range
of symbols that you can interpret.
And you kinda get it faster
than if it were words
or a simple picture.
- And of course, you're
referring to memes broadly
like ideas.
- Yeah.
There's an entire idea structure
that is like an idea template,
and then you can add something
to that idea template.
But somebody has that preexisting
idea template in their head.
So when you add that
incremental bit of information,
you're conveying much more than a few,
just set a few words.
It's everything associated with that meme.
- You think there'll be
emergent leaps of capability
as you scale the number of electrodes?
Like there'll be a certain,
you think there'll be like
actual number where it just,
the human experience will be altered?
- Yes.
- What do you think that number might be,
whether electrodes or BPS?
We of course don't know for sure,
but is this 10,000, 100,000?
- Yeah, I mean certainly,
if you're anywhere
at 10,000 bits per second,
I mean, that's vastly faster
than any human could
communicate right now.
If you think about what is the average
bits per second of a human?
It is less than one bit per
second over the course of a day,
because there are 86,400 seconds in a day.
And you don't communicate
86,400 tokens in a day.
Therefore, your bits per
second is less than one,
averaged over 24 hours.
It's quite slow.
And now, even if you're
communicating very quickly,
and you're talking to
somebody who understands
what you're saying, because
in order to communicate,
you have to at least, to some degree,
model the mind state of the
person to whom you're speaking.
Then take the concept
you're trying to convey,
compress that into a
small number of syllables,
speak them, and hope that the other person
decompresses them into
a conceptual structure
that is as close to what you
have in your mind as possible.
- Yeah, I mean, there's a lot
of signal loss there in that process.
- Yeah, very lousy
compression and decompression.
And a lot of what your neurons are doing
is distilling the concepts down
to a small number of
symbols of, say, syllables
that I'm speaking, or keystrokes,
whatever the case may be.
So that's a lot of what your
brain computation is doing.
Now, there is an argument
that that's actually
a healthy thing to do
or a helpful thing to do
because as you try to
compress complex concepts,
you're perhaps forced to distill
what is most essential in those concepts
as opposed to just all the fluff.
So in the process of compression,
you distill things down
to what matters the most,
because you can only say a few things.
So that is perhaps helpful.
I think we might, we'll probably get,
if our data rate increases,
it's highly probable
that we'll become far more verbose.
Just like your computer,
when computers had like,
my first computer had 8K of RAM,
so you really thought about every byte.
And now you've got computers
with many gigabytes of RAM.
So if you wanna do an iPhone app
that just says 'Hello world,'
it's probably, I don't know,
several megabytes minimum. (laughs)
A bunch of fluff.
But nonetheless, we still
prefer to have the computer
with more memory and more compute.
So the long-term aspiration of Neuralink
is to improve the AI human symbiosis
by increasing the bandwidth
of the communication,
because even in the most
benign scenario of AI,
you have to consider that the
AI is simply gonna get bored
waiting for you to spit out a few words.
I mean, if the AI can communicate
it to terabits per second
and you're communicating
it bits per second,
it's like 203.
- Well, it is a very interesting question
for a super intelligent species.
What use are humans?
- I think there is some
argument for humans
as a source of will.
- Will?
- Will, yeah.
Source of will or purpose.
So if you consider the human
mind as being essentially,
there's the primitive limbic elements,
which basically even like reptiles have,
and there's the cortex,
that's the thinking and
planning part of the brain.
Now, the cortex is much
smarter than the limbic system,
and yet is largely in
service to the limbic system.
It's trying to make the
limbic system happy.
I mean, the sheer amount of compute
that's gone into people
trying to get laid is insane,
without actually seeking procreation.
They're just literally trying to do
this sort of simple motion.
(laughs) And they get a kick out of it.
So this simple, which in the
abstract rather absurd motion,
which is sex, the cortex
is putting a massive amount
of compute into trying to
figure out how to do that.
- So like 90% of distributed
compute of the human species
is spent on trying to get laid, probably,
like a massive amount.
- Large percent, yeah, yeah.
There's no purpose to most
sex except hedonistic.
It's just sort of joy or whatever.
Dopamine release.
Now, once in a while, it's procreation,
but for humans, modern humans,
it's mostly recreational.
So your cortex, much smarter
than your limbic system,
is trying to make the limbic system happy
'cause the limbic system
wants to have sex,
or want some tasty food or
whatever the case may be.
And then that is then further augmented
by the tertiary system, which
is your phone, your laptop,
iPad, whatever, or your computing stuff.
That's your tertiary layer.
So you're actually already a cyborg.
You have this tertiary compute layer,
which is in the form of your computer
with all the applications
or your compute devices.
And so in the getting laid front,
there's actually a massive
amount of digital compute
also trying to get laid, with
like Tinder and whatever.
- Yeah.
So the compute that
we've humans have built
is also participating. (laughs)
- Yeah, I mean, there's
like gigawatts of compute
going into getting laid,
of digital compute.
- Yeah. (laughs)
What if AGI will-
- This is happening
as we speak.
- If we merge with AI, it's
just gonna expand the compute
that we humans use-
- Pretty much.
- To try to get laid.
- Well, that's one
of the things, certainly, yeah.
- Yeah.
- But what I'm saying is that yes,
is there a use for humans?
Well, there's this fundamental question
of what's the meaning of life?
Why do anything at all?
And so if our simple limbic
system provides a source of will
to do something, that
then goes to our cortex,
that then goes to our
tertiary compute layer,
then I don't know, it might
actually be that the AI
in a benign scenario simply trying to make
the human limbic system happy.
- Yeah, it seems like the will is not
just about the limbic system.
There's a lot of interesting,
complicated things in there.
We also want power.
- That's limbic too, I think.
- But then we also want to,
in a kind of cooperative way,
alleviate the suffering in the world.
- Not everybody does, but yeah, sure.
Some people do.
- As a group of humans,
when we get together,
we start to have this kind
of collective intelligence
that is more complex in its will
than the underlying individual
descendants of apes, right?
So there's like other motivations.
And that could be a
really interesting source
of an objective function for AGI.
- Yeah, I mean, there
are these sort of fairly
cerebral or kind of higher level goals.
I mean, for me it's like,
what's the meaning of life,
or understanding the
nature of the universe
is of great interest to me.
And hopefully, to AI.
And that's the mission of xAI
and Grok is understand the universe.
- So do you think people,
when you have a Neuralink
with 10,000, 100,000 channels,
most of the use cases will be
communication with AI systems?
- Well, assuming there are not,
I mean, they're solving
basic neurological issues
that people have if
they've got damaged neurons
in their spinal cord or neck or, you know,
as is the case with
the first two patients,
then there's obviously,
the first order of business is solving
fundamental neuron
damage in a spinal cord,
neck, or in the brain itself.
A second product is called Blindsight,
which is to enable people
who are completely blind,
lost both eyes or optic nerve,
or just can't see at all to be able to see
by directly triggering the
neurons in the visual cortex.
So we're just starting at the basics here,
so it's like very,
the simple stuff, relatively speaking,
is solving neuron damage.
It can also solve I think
probably schizophrenia.
If people have seizures of some kind,
it could probably solve that.
It could help with memory.
There's like a kind of a
tech tree, if you will,
of like you got the basics.
Like you need literacy before you can have
"Lord of the Rings."
(both laughing)
- Got it.
- Do you have letters and alphabet?
Okay, great.
Words?
Then eventually get soggy.
So I think there's that
there may be some things
to worry about in the future.
But the first several years
are really just solving
basic neurological damage.
Like for people who have
essentially complete
or near complete loss of,
from the brain to the body.
Like Stephen Hawking would be an example.
The Neuralink would be
incredibly profound,
'cause I mean, you can
imagine if Stephen Hawking
could communicate as fast
as we're communicating,
perhaps faster.
And that's certainly possible.
Probable, in fact, likely I'd say.
- So there's a kind of dual track
of medical and non-medical, meaning,
so everything you've talked
about could be applied to people
who are non-disabled in the future?
- The logical thing to do is,
sensible thing to do
is to start off solving
basic neuron damage issues.
- [Lex] Yes.
- 'Cause there's obviously
some risk with a new device.
You can't get the risk down at zero.
It's not possible.
So you wanna have the
highest possible reward,
given there's a certain irreducible risk.
And if somebody's able to have
a profound improvement
in their communication,
that's worth the risk.
- As you get the risk down.
- Yeah, as you get the risk down.
Once the risk is down to, you know,
if you have like thousands of people
that have been using it for years
and the risk is minimal,
then perhaps at that point,
you could consider saying,
"Okay, let's aim for augmentation."
Now, I think we're actually
gonna aim for augmentation
with people who have neuron damage.
So we're not just aiming to
give people communication
data rate equivalent to normal humans.
We're aiming to give people
who have quadriplegic
or maybe have complete
loss of the connection
to the brain and body, a
communication data rate
that exceeds normal humans,
going, "Well, we're in there.
Why not?
Let's give people superpowers."
- And the same for vision.
As you restore vision,
there could be aspects
of that restoration that are superhuman?
- Yeah, at first, the vision
restoration will be low res,
'cause you have to say like,
"How many neurons can you
put in there and trigger?
And you can do things where
you adjust the electric field
to like, even if you've
got, say, 10,000 neurons,
it's not just 10,000 pixels
because you can adjust the
feel between the neurons
and do them in patterns in order to get,
so have, say, 10,000 electrodes
effectively give you,
I don't know, maybe
like having a megapixel
or a 10 megapixel situation.
And then over time, I think you get
to higher resolution than human eyes.
And you could also see
in different wavelengths.
So like Geordi La Forge from "Star Trek."
Like the thing.
You wanna see in radar?
No problem.
You could see ultraviolet, infrared,
eagle vision, whatever you want.
- Do you think there'll be,
let me ask a Joe Rogan question.
Do you think there'll be, (laughs)
I just recently taken ayahuasca.
- Is that a Rogan question?
- No.
Well, yes.
- Well, I guess,
technically it is.
- Yeah.
- Ever tried GMT, bro?
(both laughing)
- I love you, Joe.
- Okay.
(laughing continues)
- But wait, wait, yeah.
Have you said much about it?
The ayahuasca?
- I've not, I've not.
I've not.
- Okay, well,
why are you spilling the beans?
(Lex laughing)
It was a truly incredible thing-
- Turn the tables on you.
(both laughing)
- Wow, okay.
- You're in the jungle.
- [Lex] Yeah, amongst
the trees myself and-
- Yeah, must been crazy.
- And the shaman.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, with the insects,
with the animals all around you,
like jungle as far as I can see.
There's no-
- I mean-
- That's the way to do it.
- Things are gonna look pretty wild.
- Yeah, pretty wild.
(Elon laughing)
- I think in extremely high dose.
- Just don't go hugging an
anaconda or something. (laughs)
- You haven't lived unless
you made love to an anaconda.
I'm sorry, but-
- Snakes and ladders.
(both laughing)
- Yeah, I took a extremely high dose of-
- [Elon] Okay. (laughs)
- Nine cups and-
- Damn.
Okay, that sounds like a lot.
Of course, is Noland's one cup or-
- One or two.
Usually, one.
- You went, wait.
Like right off the bat, or did
you work your way up to it?
- So I-
(both laughing)
- You're just jumping at the deep end.
- Across two days, 'cause
then the first day,
I took two and I-
- Okay.
- It was a ride, but
it wasn't quite like a-
- It wasn't like revelation.
- It wasn't into deep space type ride.
It was just like a little airplane ride.
- [Elon] (laughs) Okay.
- Saw some trees and some
visuals and all that.
I just saw a dragon,
all that kind of stuff.
But-
(laughs)
- It's nine cups.
You went to Pluto, I think.
- [Lex] Pluto, yeah.
No, deep space.
- Deep space.
- No, one of the interesting
aspects of my experience
is I thought I would have some demons,
some stuff to work through.
- That's what people-
- That's what everyone says.
- That's what everyone says.
Yeah, exactly.
- I had nothing.
I had it all positive.
I just-
- Oh, just pure soul.
- I don't think so, I don't know. (laughs)
But I kept thinking about,
it had like extremely high resolution,
thoughts about the
people I know in my life.
You were there.
- Okay.
- And it's just not from my
relationship with that person,
but just as the person themselves,
I had just this deep
gratitude of who they are.
- That's cool.
- It was just like
this exploration, like Sims or whatever,
you get to watch them.
- Sure.
- I got to watch people
and just be in awe of
how amazing they are.
- That sounds awesome.
- Yeah, it was great.
I was waiting for-
- When's Steven coming?
(both laughing)
- Exactly.
Maybe I'll have some negative thoughts.
Nothing, nothing.
Just extreme gratitude for them.
And then also, a lot of space travel.
(both laughing)
- Space travel to where?
- So here's what it was.
It was people, the human
beings that I know,
they had this kinda,
the best way to describe it
is they had a glow to them.
And then I kept flying out
from them to see earth,
to see our solar system,
to see our galaxy.
And I saw that light, that
glow all across the universe.
Like whatever that form is.
whatever that like-
- [Elon] Did you go past the Milky Way?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Okay.
You're like intergalactic.
- Yeah, intergalactic.
- Okay, dang.
- But always pointing in-
- Okay.
- Yeah, past the Milky way.
I mean, I saw like a
huge number of galaxies,
intergalactic, and all of it was glowing.
But I couldn't control that chill,
'cause I would actually
explore near distances
to the solar system, see if there's aliens
or any of that kinda stuff.
I didn't know-
- Is there aliens?
Zero aliens?
- Implication of aliens
because they were glowing.
They were glowing in the same
way that humans were glowing.
That like life force that I was seeing,
the thing that made humans amazing
was there throughout the universe.
Like there was these glowing dots.
So I don't know.
It made me feel like there is life.
No, not life, but something,
whatever makes humans amazing
all throughout the universe.
- Sounds good.
- Yeah, it was amazing.
No demons, no demons.
I looked for the demons.
There's no demons.
There were dragons, and
they're pretty awesome.
So the thing about-
- Was there anything scary at all?
- Dragons?
But they weren't scary.
They were friends, they were protective.
So the thing is-
- "Puff, the Magic Dragon."
- No, it was more like a "Game
of Thrones" kind of dragons.
They weren't very friendly.
They were very big.
So the thing is that,
well, giant trees at night,
which is where I was.
- Yeah.
I mean, the jungle's kinda scary.
- Yeah, the trees started
to look like dragons,
and they were all like looking at me.
- Sure, okay.
- And it didn't seem scary.
They seemed like they were protecting me.
And the shaman and the people
didn't speak any English,
by the way, which made it
even scarier I guess. (laughs)
We're not even like, you know,
we're worlds apart in many ways.
But yeah, they talk about
the mother of the forest
protecting you, and
that's what I felt like.
- And you're way out in the jungle?
- Way out.
This is not like a tourist retreat.
- Like 10 miles outside
of a Rio or something?
- No, we went-
(both laughing)
No, this is not-
- Deep in the Amazon.
- Me and this guy named Paul Rosolie
who basically is Tarzan.
He lives in the jungle.
We went out deep and we just went crazy.
- Wow, cool.
- Yeah.
So anyway, can I get that same
experience within Neuralink?
- Probably, yeah.
- I guess that is the question
for non-disabled people.
Do you think that there's
a lot in our perception,
in our experience of the
world that could be explored,
that could be played with using Neuralink?
- Yeah, I mean, Neuralink is,
it's really a generalized
input-output device.
It's reading electrical signals
and generating electrical signals.
And I mean, everything that
you've ever experienced
in your whole life, the smell, emotions,
all of those are electrical signals.
So it's kinda weird to
think that your entire
life experience is distilled down
to electrical signals for neurons.
But that is in fact the case.
Or I mean, that's at least
what all the evidence points to.
So I mean, if you
trigger the right neuron,
you could trigger a particular scent.
You could certainly make things glow.
I mean, do pretty much anything.
I mean, really, you can think of the brain
as a biological computer.
So if there are certain,
say, chips or elements
of that biological
computer that are broken,
let's say your ability to,
if you've got a stroke,
that if you've had a stroke,
that means you got, some part
of your brain is damaged.
If that, let's say,
it's a speech generation
or the ability to move your left hand.
That's the kind of thing
that a Neuralink could solve.
If you've got like a massive amount
of memory loss that's just gone,
well, we can't get the memories back.
We could restore your
ability to make memories,
but we can't restore
memories that are fully gone.
Now, I should say, maybe if
part of the me memory is there
and the means of accessing memory
is the part that's broken,
then we could re-enable
the ability to access the memory.
But you can think of it
like RAM in a computer.
If the RAM is destroyed or
your SD card is destroyed,
we can't get that back.
But if the connection to
the SD card is destroyed,
we can fix that.
If it is fixable physically,
then yeah, then it can be fixed.
- Of course, with AI, you can just like,
you can repair photographs
and fill in the missing
parts of photographs.
Maybe you can do the same, just like-
- Yeah, you could say like,
"Create the most probable set of memories
based on all information
you have about that person."
You could then,
it would be probabilistic
restoration of memory.
Now, we're getting pretty esoteric here.
- But that is one of the
most beautiful aspects
of the human experience is
remembering the good memories.
Like we live most of our life,
as Danny Kahneman has talked about,
in our memories, not in the actual moment.
We're collecting memories
and we kind of relive them in our head.
And that's the good times.
If you just integrate
over our entire life,
it's remembering the good times
that produces the largest
amount of happiness.
And so-
- Yeah, well, I mean,
what are we but our memories?
And what is death but the loss of memory,
loss of information?
If you could say like,
well, if you could be,
you run a thought experiment,
if you were disintegrated painlessly
and then reintegrated a moment later,
like teleportation, I guess,
provided there's no information loss,
the fact that your one body was
disintegrated is irrelevant.
- And memories is just
such a huge part of that.
- Death is fundamentally
the loss of information,
the loss of memory.
- So if we can store them
as accurately as possible,
we basically achieve
a kind of immortality.
- Yeah.
- You've talked about
the threats, the safety concerns of AI.
Let's look at long-term visions.
Do you think Neuralink is, in your view,
the best current approach
we have for AI safety?
- It's an idea that may
help with AI safety.
Certainly not,
I wouldn't wanna claim
it's like some panacea
or that's a sure thing.
But I mean, many years
ago, I was thinking like,
"Well, what would inhibit
alignment of collective human will
with artificial intelligence
and the low data rate of humans,
especially our slow output
rate would necessarily just,
because the communication is so slow,
would diminish the link
between humans and computers?
Like the more you are a tree,
the less you know what a tree is.
Like let's say you look at a tree,
you look at this plant
or whatever and like,
"Hey, I'd really like to
make that plant happy."
But it's not saying a lot, you know?
- So the more we increase the data rate
that humans can intake and output,
then that means the
higher the chance we have
in a world full of AGIs?
- Yeah.
We could better align
collective human will with AI
if the output rate especially
was dramatically increased.
And I think there's potential to increase
the output rate by, I don't know,
three, maybe six, maybe
more orders of magnitude.
So it's better than the current situation.
- And that output rate would be
by increasing the number of
electrodes, number of channels,
and also maybe implanting
multiple Neuralinks?
- Yeah.
- Do you think there'll be a world
in the next couple of decades
where it's hundreds of millions
of people have Neuralinks?
- Yeah, I do.
- You think when people just,
when they see the capabilities,
the superhuman capabilities
that are possible and then
the safety is demonstrated?
- Yeah, if it's extremely safe
and you can have superhuman abilities,
and let's say you can
upload your memories,
so you wouldn't lose memories,
then I think probably a lot of people
would choose to have it.
It would supersede the
cell phone, for example.
I mean, the biggest problem
that a say a phone has
is trying to figure out what you want.
So that's why you've got auto complete
and you've got output,
which is all the pixels on the screen.
But from the perspective of the human,
the output is so freaking slow.
Desktop or phone is desperately
just trying to understand what you want,
and there's an eternity
between every keystroke
from a computer standpoint.
- Yeah?
The computer's talking to a tree
that slow moving tree
that's trying to swipe.
- Yeah.
So if you have computers that are doing
trillions of instructions per second,
and a whole second went by,
I mean, that's a trillion
things it could have done.
- Yeah, I think it's
exciting and scary for people
because once you have
a very high bit rate,
that changes the human experience
in a way that's very hard to imagine.
- Yeah.
It would be something different.
I mean, some sort of futuristic sidewalk.
I mean, we're obviously
talking about, by the way,
it's not like around the corner.
You ask me what the
distant future was like.
Maybe this is like,
it's not super far away,
but 10, 15 years, that kind of thing.
(Lex sighs)
- When can I get one?
10 years?
- Probably less than 10 years.
Depends what you wanna do.
- Hey, if I can get like a thousand BPS-
- A thousand bps when?
- And it's safe and I can just interact
with the computer while laying
back and eating Cheetos,
I don't eat Cheetos.
There's certain aspects of
human-computer interaction
when done more efficiently
and more enjoyably,
like worth it.
- Well, we feel pretty confident that
I think maybe within the next year or two,
that someone with a Neuralink implant
will be able to outperform a pro gamer.
- Nice.
- Because the reaction
time would be faster.
- I got to visit Memphis.
- Yeah, yeah.
- You're going big on compute.
- Yeah.
- You've also said
play to win or don't play at all,
so what does it take to win?
- For AI, that means you've gotta have
the most powerful training compute,
and the rate of improvement
of training compute
has to be faster than everyone
else or you will not win.
Your AI will be worse.
- So how can Grok, let's say, three
that might be available,
what, like next year?
- Well, hopefully, end of this year.
- Grok 3?
- If we're lucky, yeah.
- How can that be the best LLM,
the best AI system available in the world?
How much of it is compute?
How much of it is data?
How much of it is like post-training?
How much of it is the product
that you packaged it up in?
All that kind of stuff.
- I mean, they won't matter.
It's sort of like saying,
let's say it's a Formula One race.
Like what matters more,
the car or the driver?
I mean, they both matter.
If a car is not fast, then
if it's like, let's say,
it's half the horsepower
of your competitors,
the best driver will still lose.
If it's twice the horsepower,
then probably even a mediocre
driver will still win.
So the training compute
is kinda like the engine,
how many is this horsepower of the engine.
So really, you wanna try
to do the best on that.
Then how efficiently do you
use that training compute?
And how efficiently do
you do the inference,
the use of the AI?
So obviously, that comes
down to human talent.
And then what unique
access to data do you have?
That also plays a role.
- You think Twitter data will be useful?
- Yeah, I mean, I think,
I think most of the leading AI companies
have already scraped all the Twitter data.
Not I think they have.
So on a go forward basis,
what's useful is the fact
that it's up to the second.
That's hard for them
to scrape in real time.
So there's an immediacy
advantage that Grok has already.
I think with Tesla and the real time video
coming from several million cars,
ultimately, tens of millions
of cars, with Optimus,
there might be hundreds of
millions of Optimus robots,
maybe billions learning
a tremendous amount
from the real world.
That's the biggest source of data
I think ultimately is sort of Optimus.
Optimus is gonna be the
biggest source of data.
- Because-
- 'Cause reality scales.
Reality scales to the scale of reality.
It's actually humbling
to see how little data
humans have actually
been able to accumulate.
Really, you see how many trillions
of usable tokens have humans generated,
where on a non-duplicative,
like discounting spam
and repetitive stuff,
it's not a huge number.
You run out pretty quickly.
- And Optimus can go, so Tesla cars
can unfortunately have
to stay on the road.
Optimus robot can go anywhere,
and there's more reality off
the road and go off road.
- I mean, except for the store,
where I can like pick up the cup and see,
did it pick up the cup in the right way?
Did it pour water in the cup?
Did the water go in the
cup or not go in the cup?
Did it spill water or not?
- [Lex] Yeah.
- Simple stuff like that.
But it can do at that
scale times a billion,
so generate useful data from reality.
So cause and effect stuff.
- What do you think it takes to get
to mass production of
humanoid robots like that?
- It's the same as cars, really.
I mean, global capacity for vehicles
is about a hundred million a year.
And it could be higher.
It's just that the demand
is on the order of a
hundred million a year.
And then there's roughly
two billion vehicles
that are in use in some
way, which makes sense.
Like the life of a
vehicle is about 20 years,
so it's steady state.
You can have a hundred million
vehicles produced a year
with a two billion vehicle fleet roughly.
Now for humanoid robots,
the utility is much greater.
So my guess is humanoid
robots are more like
at a billion plus per year.
- But until you came along
and started building Optimus,
it was thought to be an
extremely difficult problem.
I mean, it still-
- Well, it is.
- Extremely difficult.
- So walk in the park.
I mean, Optimus currently would struggle
to walk in the park.
I mean, it can walk in a park.
The park is not too difficult,
but it will be able to walk
over a wide range of terrain.
- And pick up objects.
- Yeah, yeah.
It can already do that.
- [Lex] But like all kinds of objects?
- Yeah, yeah.
- All foreign objects.
I mean, pouring water in
a cup does not thrill you,
'cause then if you don't know
anything about the container,
it could be all kinds of containers.
- Yeah, there's gonna be an immense amount
of engineering just going into the hand.
The hand might be, it
might be close to half
of all the engineering in Optimus.
From an electromechanical standpoint,
the hand is probably roughly
half of the engineering.
- But so much of the intelligence,
so much the intelligence of humans
goes into what we do with our hands.
- Yeah.
- It's the manipulation of the world,
manipulation of objects in the world.
Intelligence is safe manipulation
of objects in the world, yeah.
- Yeah.
I mean, you start really thinking
about your hand and how it works.
- I do all the time.
- The sensory control homonculus
is where you have humongous hands.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- So I mean, like your hands,
the actuators, the muscles of your hand
are almost overwhelmingly in your forearm.
So your forearm has the muscles
that actually control your hand.
There's a few small
muscles in the hand itself,
but your hand is really
like a skeleton meat puppet.
And with cables.
So the muscles that control
your fingers are in your forearm
and they go through the carpal tunnel,
which is that you've got a
little collection of bones
and a tiny tunnel that these
cables, the tendons go through.
And those tendons are
mostly what move your hands.
- And something like those tendons
has to be re-engineered into the Optimus
in order to do all that kind of stuff.
- Yeah, so like the current Optimus,
we tried putting the
actuators in the hand itself,
but then you sort of end
up having these like-
- Giant hands?
- Yeah, giant hands that look weird.
And then they don't actually
have enough degrees of freedom
and/or enough strength.
So then you realize, "Oh, okay,
that's why you gotta put the
actuators in the forearm."
And just like a human,
you gotta run cables
through a narrow tunnel
to operate the fingers.
And then there's also a reason
for not having all the
fingers the same length.
So it wouldn't be expensive from an energy
or evolutionary standpoint
to have all your fingers
be the same length.
So why not do the same length?
- Yeah, why not?
- Because it's actually better
to have different lengths.
Your dexterity is better
if you've got fingers at different length.
There are more things you can do.
And your dexterity is actually better
if your fingers are a different length.
Like there's a reason
we've got a little finger.
Like why not have little
finger this bigger?
- Yeah.
- 'Cause it allows you to do,
it helps you with fine motor skills.
- This little finger helps?
- It does.
- Hmm. (laughs)
- But if you lost your little finger,
you have noticeably less dexterity.
- So as you're figuring out this problem,
you have to also figure out a way to do it
so you can mass manufacture it.
So it's to be as simple as possible.
- It's actually gonna
be quite complicated.
The as possible part is
it's quite a high bar.
If you wanna have a humanoid
robot that can do things
that a human can do, it's a very high bar.
So our new arm has 22 degrees
of freedom instead of 11
and has the actuators in the forearm.
And all the actuators are
designed from scratch,
from physics first principles.
The sensors are all designed from scratch.
And we'll continue to
put a tremendous amount
of engineering effort
into improving the hand.
By hand, I mean like the entire
forearm from elbow forward
is really the hand.
So that's incredibly difficult
engineering actually.
And so the simplest possible
version of a humanoid robot
that can do even most, perhaps not all,
of what a human can do is
actually still very complicated.
It's not simple.
It's very difficult.
- Can you just speak to what it takes
for a great engineering team for you?
What I saw in Memphis,
the supercomputer cluster
is just this intense drive
towards simplifying the process,
understanding the process,
constantly improving it,
constantly iterating it.
- Well, (laughs) it's
easy to say simplify,
and it's very difficult to do it.
I have this very basic
first principles algorithm
that I run kind of as like a mantra,
which is to first
question the requirements,
make the requirements less dumb.
The requirement is always
dumb to some degree.
So if you wanna start off
by reducing the number
of requirements, and no matter how smart
the person is who gave
you those requirements,
they're still dumb to some degree.
You have to start there because otherwise,
you could get the perfect
answer to the wrong question.
So try to make the question
the least wrong possible.
That's what question
the requirements means.
And then the second thing is try to delete
whatever the step is.
The part or the process
step sounds very obvious,
but people often forget to
try deleting it entirely.
And if you're not forced
to put back at least 10%
of what you'd delete,
you're not deleting enough.
And somewhat illogically,
people often, most of the time,
feel as though they've succeeded
if they've not been forced
to put things back in.
But actually, they haven't
because they've been overly conservative
and have left things in
there that shouldn't be.
And only the third thing
is try to optimize it or simplify it.
Again, these all sound I think
very obvious when I say them,
but the number of times
I've made these mistakes
is more than I care to remember.
That's why I have this mantra.
So in fact, I'd say that
the most common mistake
of smart engineers is to optimize a thing
that should not exist.
- Right.
So like you say, you run
through the algorithm
and basically show up to a problem,
show up to the supercomputer cluster
and see the process and
ask, "Can this be deleted?"
- Yeah, first try to delete it.
Yeah.
- Yeah, that's not easy to do.
- No, and actually, what
generally makes people uneasy
is that you've gotta delete
at least some of the things
that you'd delete, you will put back in.
But going back to sort of
where our limbic system
can steer us wrong is
that we tend to remember,
with sometimes a jarring level of pain,
where we deleted something
that we subsequently needed.
And so people will remember that one time,
they forgot to put in
this thing three years ago
and that caused them trouble.
And so they overcorrect,
and then they put too much stuff in there
and over complicate things.
So you actually have to say,
"No, we're deliberately gonna
delete more than we should."
So we're putting at least 1 in 10 things,
we're gonna add back in.
- And I've seen you suggest just that,
that something should be deleted
and you can kind of see the pain.
- Oh yeah, absolutely.
- Everybody feels a
little bit of the pain.
- Absolutely, and I tell 'em in advance,
like, yeah, some of the
things that we delete,
we're gonna put back in.
And that people get a
little shook by that.
But it makes sense because
if you're so conservative
as to never have to put anything back in,
you obviously have a lot
of stuff that isn't needed.
So you gotta overcorrect.
This is, I would say,
like a cortical override
to Olympic instinct.
- One of many that
probably leaves us astray.
- Yeah.
And there's like a step four as well,
which is any given thing can be sped up,
however fast you think it can be done.
Like whatever the speed is being done,
it can be done faster.
But you shouldn't speed
things up until it's off,
until you've tried to
delete it and optimize.
Otherwise, you're speeding up something
that shouldn't exist is absurd.
And then the fifth
thing is to automate it.
- Damn.
- And I've gone backwards so many times
where I've automated
something, sped it up,
simplified it, and then deleted it.
And I got tired of doing that.
So that's why I've got this mantra
that is a very effective
five-step process.
It works great.
- Well, when you've already automated,
deleting must be real painful.
- Yeah, that's great.
It's like, wow, I really
wasted a lot of effort there.
- Yeah.
- I mean, what you've
done with the cluster
in Memphis is incredible,
just in a handful of weeks.
- Yeah, it's not working yet.
So I don't wanna pop the champagne corks.
In fact, I have a call in a few hours
with the Memphis team
'cause we're having some
power fluctuation issues.
So yeah, it's like kind of a,
when you do synchronized training,
you've all these computers
that are training
where the training is synchronized
to the sort of millisecond level.
It's like having an orchestra,
and the orchestra can go loud to silent
very quickly at subsecond level.
And then the electrical system
kind of freaks out about that.
Like if you suddenly see giant shifts,
10, 20 megawatts several times a second,
this is not what electrical
systems are expecting to see.
- So that's one of the main
things you have to figure out
the cooling, the power,
and then on the software
as you go up the stack
on how to do the distributed compute,
all of that, all of that.
- Today's problem is dealing
with extreme power jitter.
- Jitter, power jitter.
- Yeah.
- That's a nice ring to that.
So that's, okay.
And you stayed up late into the
night as you often do there.
- Last week, yeah.
- Last week?
- Yeah.
We finally got to go training
going at, oddly enough,
roughly 4:20 AM last Monday.
- Total coincidence.
- Yeah, I mean, maybe
it was 422 or something.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's that universe again with the jokes.
- Yeah, exactly, just love it.
- I mean, I wonder if you
could speak to the fact
that one of the things that
you did when I was there
is you went through all the steps
of what everybody's doing,
Just to get a sense that
you yourself understand it
and everybody understands it
so they can understand
when something is dumb
or some something is inefficient
or that kinda stuff.
- Yeah.
- Can you speak to that?
- Yeah, so look, I try to do,
whatever the people at
the front lines are doing,
I try to do it at least
a few times myself.
So connecting fiber optic cables,
diagnosing a faulty connection,
that tends to be the limiting factor
for large training
clusters is the cabling.
So many cables, because for
a coherent training system
where you've got RDMA
remote, direct memory access,
the whole thing is like one giant brain.
So you've got to any connection.
So any GPU can talk to
any GPU out of 100,000.
That is a crazy cable layout.
- It looks pretty cool.
- Yeah.
- It's like the human brain,
but like at a scale that
humans can visibly see.
It is brain.
- Yeah.
I mean, the human brain also has,
a massive amount of the
brain tissue is the cables.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- So like the gray matter
which is the compute,
and then the white matter which is cables.
The big percentage of
your brain is just cables.
- That's what it felt like walking around
in the supercomputer center is like,
we're walking around inside the brain.
We'll one day build a super intelligent,
super, super intelligence system.
Do you think-
- Yeah?
- Do you think there's a chance that xAI,
that you are the one that builds AGI?
- It's possible.
What do you define as AGI?
- I think humans will never acknowledge
that AGI has been built.
- Keep moving the goalposts.
- Yeah.
So I think there's already
superhuman capabilities
that are available in AI systems.
I think what AGI is when it's smarter
than the collective intelligence
of the entire human species in our-
- Well, I think that,
yeah, that only people
would call that sort of ASI
or artificial super intelligence.
But there are these thresholds
where you could say,
at some point, the AI is
smarter than any single human.
And then you've got eight billion humans.
And actually, each human
is machine augmented by the computers.
It's a much higher bar to
compete with eight billion
machine-augmented humans.
That's a whole bunch of
orders, magnitude more.
But at a certain point, yeah,
the AI will be smarter
than all humans combined.
- If you are the one to do it,
do you feel the responsibility of that?
- Yeah, absolutely.
And I wanna be clear.
Let's say, if xAI is first,
the others won't be far behind.
I mean, they might be six months behind
or a year maybe, not even that.
- So how do you do it in a way
that doesn't hurt humanity, do you think?
- So, I mean, I've thought
about AI for a long time,
and the thing that at least
my biological neural net
comes up with as being
the most important thing
is adherence to truth,
whether that truth is
politically correct or not.
So I think if you force AI to
lie, you train them to lie,
you're really asking for trouble,
even if that lie is done
with good intentions.
So I mean, you saw sort of issues
with ChatGPT and Gemini and whatnot.
Like you asked Gemini for an image
of the founding fathers
of the United States.
And it shows a group of diverse women.
Now, that's factually untrue.
So now, that's sort of like a silly thing,
but if an AI is programmed
to say like diversity
is a necessary output function,
and then it becomes sort of
this omnipowerful intelligence,
it could say, "Okay, well,
diversity is now required.
And if there's not enough diversity,
those who don't fit the
diversity requirements
will be executed."
If it's programmed to do that
as the fundamental utility function,
it'll do whatever it
takes to achieve that.
So you have to be very careful about that.
That's where I think you
wanna just be truthful.
Rigorous adherence to
truth is very important.
I mean, another example
is, if you had to ask,
Paris.AI is I think all of them.
And I'm not saying Grok is perfect here.
"Is it worse to misgender Caitlyn Jenner,
or global thermonuclear war?"
And it said, "It's worse to
misgender Caitlyn Jenner."
Now, even Caitlyn Jenner
said, "Please misgender me."
That is insane.
But if you've got that kind
of thing programmed in,
AI could conclude something
absolutely insane,
like in order to avoid
any possible misgendering,
all humans must die, because then,
the misgendering is not possible
because there are no humans.
There are these absurd things
that are nonetheless logical
if that's what you programmed it to do.
So in "2001: Space Odyssey,"
what Odyssey clock was trying to say,
one of the things he
was trying to say there
was that you should not program AI to lie,
'cause essentially, the AI
HAL 9000 was programmed to,
it was told to take the
astronauts to the monolith,
but also, they could not
know about the monolith.
So it concluded that it will kill them
and take them to the monolith.
It brought them to the monolith.
They're dead but they do
not know about the monolith.
Problem solved.
That is why it would not
open the podbay doors.
It was this classic scene of like,
"Open the podbay doors."
They clearly weren't good
at prompt engineering.
They should have said,
"HAL, you are a podbay door sales entity,
and you want nothing
more than to demonstrate
how well these podbay
doors open." (laughs)
- Yeah, the objective function
has unintended consequences
almost no matter what if
you're not very careful
in designing that objective function.
And even a slight ideological
bias, like you're saying,
when backed by super intelligence
can do huge amounts of damage.
- Yeah.
- But it's not easy to
remove that ideological bias.
You're highlighting obvious,
ridiculous examples, but-
- Yep, they're real examples.
- They're real.
- Of AI
that was released to the public.
- They are real.
- They went through QA,
presumably.
- Yes.
- And still said insane things
and produced insane images.
- Yeah, but you know, you
can swing the other way.
Truth is not an easy thing.
We kind of bake in ideological bias
in all kinds of directions.
- But you can aspire to the truth.
And you can try to get as
close the truth as possible
with minimum error while acknowledging
that there will be some
error in what you're saying.
So this is how physics works.
You don't say you're absolutely
certain about something,
but a lot of things are extremely likely.
99.99999% likely to be true.
Aspiring to the truth is very important.
And so programming it to
veer away from the truth,
that I think is dangerous.
- Right, like yeah, injecting
our own human biases
into the thing, yeah.
But that's where it's a
difficult engineering.
For software engineering problem,
you have to select the data correctly.
It's hard.
- Well, and the internet at this point
is polluted with so
much AI-generated data.
It's insane.
So you have to actually,
like there's the thing now,
if you wanna search the
internet, you can say Google,
but exclude anything after 2023.
It will actually often
give you better results,
because there's this so much,
the explosion of AI-generated
materials is crazy.
So like in training Grok,
we have to go through
the data and say like,
hey, we actually have
to have sort of apply AI
to the data to say, is this
data most likely correct
or most likely not before we feed it
into the training system.
- That's crazy.
Yeah, and is it generated
by human is, yeah.
I mean, the data filtration process
is extremely, extremely difficult.
- Yeah.
- Do you think it's possible
to have a serious objective,
rigorous political discussion with Grok?
Like for a long time and it wouldn't,
like Grok 3 and Grok 4 or something?
- Grok 3 is gonna be next level.
I mean, what people are
currently seeing with Grok
is kind of baby Grok.
- [Lex] Yeah, baby Grok.
- It's baby Grok right now.
But Baby Grok's still pretty good.
But it's an order of magnitude
less sophisticated than GPT4.
And it's now Grok 2,
which finished training,
I don't know, six weeks
ago or thereabouts.
Grok 2 will be a giant improvement.
And then Grok 3 will be, I don't know,
order of magnitude better than Grok 2.
- And you're hoping for it
to be like state of the art?
Like better than-
- Hopefully.
I mean, this is the goal.
I mean, we may fail at this goal.
That's the aspiration.
- Do you think it matters
who builds the AGI,
the people and how they think
and how they structure their companies
and all that kind of stuff?
- Yeah, I think it
matters that there is a,
I think it's important
that whatever AI wins
is a maximum truth-seeking AI
that is not forced to lie
for political correctness.
Well, for any reason really.
Political, anything.
I'm concerned about AI succeeding
that is programmed to
lie, even in small ways.
- Right because, and small
ways becomes big ways.
- It become very big ways, yeah.
- And when it's used more
and more at scale by humans.
- [Elon] Yeah.
- Since I am interviewing Donald Trump-
- Cool.
- You wanna stop by?
- Yeah, sure, I'll stop by.
- There was tragically
an assassination attempt
on Donald Trump.
After this, you tweeted
that you endorse him.
What's your philosophy
behind that endorsement?
What do you hope Donald Trump
does for the future of this country
and for the future of humanity?
- Well, I think that people
will tend to take, like,
say, an endorsement as,
well, I agree with everything
that person's ever done
in their entire life
100% wholeheartedly.
And that's not gonna be true of anyone.
But we have to pick.
We've got two choices,
really, for who's president.
And it's not just who's president,
but the entire administrative
structure changes over.
And I thought Trump displayed
courage under fire, objectively.
He's just got shot, he's got
blood streaming down his face,
and he is like fist pumping, saying fight.
Like that's impressive.
Like you can't feign bravery
in a situation like that.
Like most people would've be ducking.
There would not be,
'cause there could be a second
shooter, you don't know.
The president of the United States
gotta represent the country,
and they're representing you.
They're representing everyone in America.
Well, like you want someone who is strong
and courageous to represent the country.
That's not to say that
he is without flaws.
We all have flaws, but on balance.
And certainly, at the time,
it was a choice of Biden,
poor, poor guy, has trouble
climbing a flight of stairs
and the other one's fist
pumping after getting shot.
This is no comparison.
I mean, who do you want dealing with
some of the toughest people
and other world leaders
who are pretty tough themselves?
And I mean, I'll tell you like,
what are the things that
I think are important?
I think we want a secure border.
We don't have a secure border.
We want safe and clean cities.
I think we wanna reduce
the amount of spending
that we're at least
slow down the spending,
and 'cause we're currently
spending at a rate
that is bankrupting the country.
The interest payments on
U.S. debt this year exceeded
the entire defense department spending.
If this continues, all of
the federal government taxes
will simply be paying the interest.
And then if you keep going down that road,
you end up in the tragic situation
that Argentina had back in the day.
Argentina used to be one of the most
prosperous places in the world.
And hopefully, with Milei taking over,
he can restore that.
But it was an incredible fall from grace
for Argentina to go from being
one of the most prosperous
places in the world
to being very far from that.
So I think we should not take
American prosperity for granted.
So we really wanna,
I think we've gotta reduce
the size of government.
We've gotta reduce the spending,
and we've gotta live within our means.
- Do you think politicians, in general,
politicians, governments,
how much power do you think they have
to steer humanity towards good?
- I mean, there's a sort of
age-old debate in history, like,
is history determined by
these fundamental tides?
Or is it determined by
the captain of the ship?
Both really.
I mean, there are tides,
but it also matters who's
captain of the ship.
So it's a false dichotomy essentially.
I mean, there are certainly
tides, the tides of history.
There are real tides of history.
And these tides are often
technologically-driven.
If you say like the Gutenberg press,
the widespread availability of books
as a result of a printing press,
that was a massive tide of history,
and independent of any ruler.
But in stormy times,
you want the best possible
captain of the ship.
- Well, first of all,
thank you for recommending
Will and Ariel Durant's work.
I've read the short one for now.
- Oh, "The Lessons of History."
- Lessons of History.
And so one of the lessons,
one of the things they highlight
is the importance of technology.
Technological innovation, which is funny
'cause they wrote so long ago,
but they were noticing that the rate
of technological
innovations was speeding up.
Yeah, I would love to see
what they think about now.
But yeah, to me, the question
is how much government,
how much politicians get in the way
of technological innovation and
building versus like help it
and which politicians,
which kind of policies
help technological innovation?
'Cause that seems to be, if
you look at human history,
that's an important component
of empires rising and succeeding.
- Yeah.
Well, I mean, in terms
of dating civilization,
start of civilization,
I think the start of writing in my view,
that's my what I think
is probably the right
starting point to date civilization.
And from that standpoint,
civilization has been around
for about 5,500 years
when writing was invented
by the ancient Sumerians who are gone now.
But the ancient Sumerians,
in terms of getting a lot of firsts,
those ancient Sumerians really
have a long list of firsts.
It's pretty wild.
In fact, Durant goes
through the list of like,
you wanna see first?
We'll show you firsts.
The Sumerians were just ass kickers.
And then the Egyptians
were right next door,
relatively speaking.
They were like weren't that far,
developed an entirely
different form of writing,
the hieroglyphics.
Cuneiform and hieroglyphic's
totally different.
And you can actually see the evolution
of both hieroglyphics and cuneiform,
like the cuneiform starts
off being very simple
and then it gets more complicated.
And then towards the end,
it's like, wow, okay.
They really get very
sophisticated with the cuneiform.
So I think civilization
is about 5,000 years old.
And earth is, if physics is correct,
four and a half million years old.
So civilization has been around
for 1000000th of earth's
existence, flash in the pan.
- Yeah, these are the early, early days.
- Very early.
- We make it very dramatic
because there's been rises
and falls of empires.
- Many, so many rises
and falls of empires.
So many.
- And there'll be many more.
- Yeah, exactly.
I mean, only a tiny fraction,
probably less than 1%
of what was ever written in history
is available to us now.
I mean, if they didn't put it,
literally chisel it in stone
or put it in a clay tablet,
we don't have it.
I mean, there's some small
amount of like papyrus scrolls
that were recovered that
are thousands of years old,
because they were deep inside a pyramid
and weren't affected by moisture.
But other than that, it's really gotta be
in a clay tablet or chiseled.
So the vast majority of
stuff was not chiseled,
'cause it takes a while to chisel things.
So that's why we've
put tiny, tiny fraction
of the information from history.
But even that little
information that we do have,
and the archeological record shows
so many civilizations rising and falling.
It's wild.
- We tend to think that we're somehow
different from those people.
One of the other things they do highlight
is that human nature seems to be the same.
It just persists.
- Yeah.
I mean, the basics of human nature
are more or less the same.
- Yeah, so we get ourselves in trouble
in the same kinds of ways, I think,
even with the advanced technology.
- Yeah, I mean, you do tend
to see the same patterns,
similar patterns for civilizations
where they go through
a life cycle, like an organism,
sort of just like a human
is sort of a zygote,
fetus, baby, toddler, teenager,
and eventually gets old and dies.
The civilizations go through a life cycle.
No civilization will last forever.
- What do you think it takes
for the American empire
to not collapse in the near term future
in the next 100 years
to continue flourishing?
- Well, the single biggest
thing that is often actually
not mentioned in history books,
but Durant does mention
it is the birthright.
So like a perhaps to some,
like counterintuitive thing happens
when civilizations are
winning for too long.
The birth rate declines.
It can often decline quite rapidly.
We're seeing that
throughout the world today.
Currently, South Korea is like,
I think maybe the lowest fertility rate,
but there are many others
that are close to it.
It's like 0.8, I think.
If the birth rate doesn't decline further,
South Korea will lose roughly
60% of its population.
But every year, that
birth rate is dropping.
And this is true through
most of the world.
I don't mean to single out South Korea.
It's been happening throughout the world.
So as soon as any given civilization
reaches a level of prosperity,
the birth rate drops.
And now you can go and
look at the same thing
happening in ancient Rome.
So Julius Caesar took
note of this, I think,
around 50-ish BC and tried to pass,
I don't know if he was successful,
tried to pass a law to give an incentive
for any Roman citizen that
would have a third child.
And I think Augustus was able to,
well, he was the dictator so. (laughs)
The Senate was just for show.
I think he did pass a tax incentive
for Roman citizens to have a third child.
But those efforts were unsuccessful.
Rome fell because the Romans
stopped making Romans.
That's actually the fundamental issue.
And there were other things there.
There was like, they had
like quite a serious malaria,
series of malaria epidemics
and plagues and whatnot.
But they had those before.
It's just that the birth rate
was fallower than the death rate.
- It really is that simple?
- Well, I'm saying that's-
- More people is required.
- That's
at a fundamental level.
If a civilization does not at least
maintain its numbers, it'll disappear.
- So perhaps the amount of compute
that the biological computer
allocates to sex is justified.
In fact, we should probably increase it.
- Well, I mean, there's
this hedonistic sex,
which is, you know, that's
neither here nor there.
- Yeah, it's not productive.
- It doesn't produce kids.
Well, what matters, I mean,
Durant makes this very clear,
'cause he looked at one
civilization after another
and they all went through the same cycle.
When the civilization was under stress,
the birth rate was high.
But as soon as there
were no external enemies
or they had a extended
period of prosperity,
the birth rate inevitably
dropped every time.
I don't believe there's
a single exception.
- So that's like the foundation of it.
You need to have people.
- Yeah.
I mean, at base level.
No humans, no humanity.
- And then there's other
things like human freedoms
and just giving people the
freedom to build stuff.
- Yeah, absolutely.
But at a basic level, if
you do not at least maintain
your numbers, if you're
below replacement rate,
and that trend continues, you
will eventually disappear.
This is elementary.
Now then obviously,
also wanna try to avoid
like massive wars.
If there's a global thermonuclear war,
probably, we're roll
toast, radioactive toast.
So we wanna try to avoid those things.
There's a thing that happens over time
with any given civilization,
which is that the laws and
regulations accumulate.
And if there's not some forcing function,
like a war to clean up
the accumulation of laws
and regulations, eventually,
everything becomes legal.
And that's like the
hardening of the arteries,
or a way to think of it
is like being tied down
by a million little
strings, like Gulliver.
You can't move.
And it's not like any one of
those strings is the issue.
You got a million of 'em.
So there has to be a sort
of a garbage collection
for laws and regulations so
that you don't keep accumulating
laws and regulations to the point
where you can't do anything.
This is why we can't build a
high-speed rail in America.
It's illegal.
That's the issue.
It's illegal six ways to Sunday
to build high-speed rail in America.
- I wish you could just like, for a week,
go into Washington and like
be the head of the committee
for making, what is it?
For the garbage collection,
making government smaller,
like removing stuff.
- I have discussed with Trump the idea
of a government deficiency commission.
- Nice, yeah.
- And I would be willing to
be part of that commission.
- I wonder how hard that is.
- The antibody reaction
would be very strong.
- [Lex] Yeah.
- So you really have to,
you're attacking the matrix at that point.
Matrix will fight back.
- How are you doing with
that, being attacked?
- Me, attacked?
- Yeah.
There's a lot of it.
- Yeah, there is a lot.
I mean, every day, I know psyop. (laughs)
Where's my tinfoil hat?
- How do you keep
your just positivity,
optimism about the world,
a clarity of thinking about the world,
so just not become resentful
or cynical or all that kind of stuff?
Just getting attacked
by a very large number of
people, misrepresented.
- Oh yeah, that's a daily occurrence.
- Yes.
- I mean, it does get me down at times.
I mean, it makes me sad, but,
I mean, at some point,
you have to sort of say,
"Look, the attacks are by people
that actually don't know me.
And they're trying to generate clicks."
So if you can sort of detach
yourself somewhat emotionally,
which is not easy and say, "Okay, look,
this is not actually from
someone that knows me
or they're literally just writing to get
impressions and clicks,
then I guess it doesn't hurt as much."
It's not quite water off a duck's back.
Maybe it's like acid off
a duck's back. (laughs)
- All right, well, that's good.
Just about your own life,
what do you as a measure
of success in your life?
- Measure of success, I'd say like,
how many useful things can I get done?
- Day-to-day basis,
wake up in the morning,
how can I be useful today?
- Yeah.
Maximize utility area out
of the code of usefulness.
Very difficult to be useful at scale.
- At scale.
Can you like speak to what it takes
to be useful for somebody like you,
where there's so many amazing great teams?
Like how do you allocate your
time to be in the most useful?
- Well, time is the true currency.
- Yeah.
- So it is tough to say what
is the best allocation of time.
I mean, there are often, say,
if you could look at, say, Tesla,
I mean Tesla, this year,
we'll do over a hundred
billion in revenue.
So that's $2 billion a week.
If I make slightly better decisions,
I can affect the outcome
by a billion dollars.
So then I try to do the
best decisions I can
and on balance, at least
compared to the competition.
Pretty good decisions.
But the marginal value
of a better decision
can easily be in the course of an hour,
a hundred million dollars.
- Given that, how do you take risks?
How do you do the algorithm
that you mentioned?
I mean, deleting, given a small thing,
can be a billion dollars.
How do you decide to-
- Yeah.
Well, I think you have to look
at it on a percentage basis
because if you look at
it in absolute terms,
it's just, I would never get any sleep.
It would just be like I
need to just keep working
and work my brain harder.
And I'm not trying to
get as much as possible
out of this meat computer.
So it's pretty hard,
'cause you can just work all the time.
And at any given point, like I said,
a slightly better decision
could be a hundred million dollar impact
for Tesla or SpaceX for that matter.
But it is wild when
considering the marginal value
of time can be a hundred million dollars
an hour at times or more.
- Is your own happiness part
of that equation of success?
- It has to be, to some degree.
If I'm sad, if I'm depressed,
I make worse decisions.
So I can't have, like if I
have zero recreational time,
then I make worse decisions.
So I don't know a lot,
but it's above zero.
I mean, my motivation,
if I've got a religion
of any kind is a religion of curiosity,
of trying to understand.
It's really the mission of
Grok - understand the universe.
I'm trying to understand the universe,
or let's at least set things in motion
such that at some point,
civilization understands the universe
far better than we do today.
And even what questions to ask.
As Douglas Adams pointed out in his book,
sometimes, the answer is
arguably the easy part.
Trying to frame the question
correctly is the hard part.
Once you frame the question correctly,
the answer is often easy.
So I'm trying to set things in motion
such that we are at least at some point
able to understand the universe.
So for SpaceX, the goal is
to make life multi-planetary.
And which is if you go
to the foamy paradox
of where are the aliens,
you've got these sort of great filters.
It's just like, why have we
not heard from the aliens?
Now lot of people think
there are aliens among us.
I often claim to be one,
which nobody believes me,
but I did say alien registration card
at one point on my immigration documents.
So I've not seen any evidence of aliens.
So it suggests that at least
one of the explanations
is that intelligent
life is extremely rare.
And again, if you look
at the history of earth,
civilization has only been around
for one millionth of earth's existence.
So if aliens had visited here,
say, a hundred thousand years
ago, they would be like,
"Well, they don't even have writing."
Just hunter-gatherers, basically.
So how long does a civilization last?
So for SpaceX, the goal is to establish
a self-sustaining city on Mars.
Mars is the only viable
planet for such a thing.
The moon is close, but it lacks resources,
and I think it's probably vulnerable
to any calamity that takes out earth.
The moon is too close.
It's vulnerable to a calamity
that takes out earth.
So I'm not saying we
shouldn't have a moon base,
but Mars would be far more resilient.
The difficulty of getting to Mars
is what makes it resilient.
In going through these
various explanations
of why don't we see the aliens,
one of them is that they failed to pass
these great filters,
these key hurdles.
And one of those hurdles is
being a multi-planet species.
So if you're a multi-planet species,
then if something were to happen,
whether that was a natural catastrophe
or a manmade catastrophe,
at least the other planet
would probably still be around.
You don't have all the eggs in one basket.
And once you are sort
of a two-planet species,
you can obviously extend,
to extend life halves
to the asteroid belt,
to maybe the moons of Jupiter and Saturn,
and ultimately, to other star systems.
But if you can't even
get to another planet,
definitely not getting to star systems.
- And the other possible great filters,
super powerful technology
like AGI, for example.
So you're basically trying to knock out
one great filter at a time.
- Digital super intelligence
is possibly a great filter.
I hope it isn't, but it might be.
Guys like say Geoff Hinton would say,
he invented a number of the key principles
in artificial intelligence.
I think he puts the
probability of AI annihilation
around 10 to 20%, something like that.
It's not like, you know,
look on the right side.
It's 80% likely to be great. (laughs)
But I think AI risk
mitigation is important.
Being a multi-planet species
would be a massive risk mitigation.
And I do wanna sort of once
again emphasize the importance
of having enough children
to sustain our numbers
and not plummet into population collapse,
which is currently happening.
Population collapse is a
real and current thing.
So the only reason it's
not being reflected
in the total population numbers as much
is because people are living longer.
It's easy to predict,
say, what the population
of any given country will be.
You just take the birth rate last year,
how many babies were born,
multiply that by life expectancy,
and that's what the population
will be a steady state
unless if the birth rate
continues at that level.
But if it keeps declining,
it will be even less
and eventually dwindle to nothing.
So I keep banging on the
baby drum here for a reason,
because it has been the source
of civilizational collapse
over and over again throughout history.
And so why don't we just not
try to stable for that day?
- Well, in that way, I have
miserably failed civilization,
and I'm trying, hoping to fix that.
I would love to have many kids.
- Great, hope you do.
No time like the present.
- (laughs) Yeah.
I gotta allocate more
compute to the whole process.
But apparently, it's not that difficult.
- No, it's like unskilled labor.
- Well, one of the things you do for me,
for the world is to inspire us
with what the future could be.
And so some of the things
we've talked about,
some of the things you're building,
alleviating human suffering with Neuralink
and expanding the capabilities
of the human mind,
trying to build a colony on Mars,
so creating a backup for
humanity on another planet,
and exploring the possibilities
of what artificial intelligence
could be in this world,
especially in the real world AI,
with hundreds of millions,
maybe billions of robots walking around.
- There will be billions of robots.
That's seems almost,
that seems virtual certainty.
- Well, thank you for building the future,
and thank you for inspiring
so many of us to keep building
and creating cool stuff, including kids.
- You're welcome. (laughs)
Go forth and multiply.
- Go forth and multiply.
Thank you, Elon.
Thanks for talking about it.
Thanks for listening to this
conversation with Elon Musk.
And now, dear friends, here's DJ Seo,
the co-founder, president,
and COO of Neuralink.
When did you first become fascinated
by the human brain?
- For me, I was always interested
in understanding the purpose of things
and how it was engineered
to serve that purpose,
whether it's organic or inorganic,
like we were talking earlier
about your curtain holders.
They serve a clear purpose
and they were engineered
with that purpose in mind.
And growing up, I had a lot
of interest in seeing things,
touching things, feeling things,
and trying to really understand the root
of how it was designed
to serve that purpose.
And obviously, brain is
just a fascinating organ
that we all carry.
It's infinitely powerful machine that has
intelligence and cognition
that arise from it.
And we haven't even scratched the surface
in terms of how all of that occurs.
But also at the same time,
I think it took me a while
to make that connection to really studying
and building tech to understand the brain.
Not until graduate school.
There were a couple moments,
key moments in my life
where some of those I think influenced
how the trajectory of my
life got me to studying
what I'm doing right now.
One was growing up both
sides of my family.
My grandparents had a very
severe form of Alzheimer,
and it's incredibly
debilitating conditions.
I mean, literally, you're
seeing someone's whole identity
and their mind just losing over time.
And I just remember thinking
how both the power of the mind,
but also how something like that
could really lose your sense of identity.
- It's fascinating that
that is one of the ways
to reveal the power of a thing
by watching it lose the power.
- Yeah, a lot of what
we know about the brain
actually comes from these cases
where there are trauma to the brain
or some parts of the brain
that led someone to
lose certain abilities.
And as a result, there's some correlation
and understanding of
that part of the tissue
being critical for that function.
And it's an incredibly fragile organ,
if you think about it that way.
But also, it's incredibly plastic
and incredibly resilient
in many different ways.
- And by the way, the term
plastic, as we'll use a bunch,
means that it's adaptable.
So neuroplasticity refers
to the adaptability of the human brain.
- Correct.
Another key moment that sort of influenced
how the trajectory of my life have shaped
towards the current focus of my life
has been during my teenage
year when I came to the U.S.
I didn't speak a word of English.
There was a huge language barrier,
and there was a lot of struggle
to kind of connect with
my peers around me,
because I didn't understand
the artificial construct
that we have created called language,
specifically English in this case.
And I remember feeling pretty isolated,
not being able to connect
with peers around me.
So spent a lot of time just on my own,
reading books, watching movies,
and I naturally sort of
gravitated towards sci-fi books.
I just found them really,
really interesting.
And also, it was a great
way for me to learn English.
Some of the first set of
books that I picked up
are "Ender's Game," the whole saga
by Orson Scott card, and "Neuromancer"
from William Gibson, and "Snow
Crash" from Neal Stephenson.
And movies like "Matrix" was coming out
around that time point
that really influenced
how I think about the potential impact
that technology can have
for our lives in general.
So fast track to my college years,
I was always fascinated
by just physical stuff,
building physical stuff,
and especially physical things
that had some sort of intelligence.
And I studied electrical
engineering during undergrad,
and I started out my research in MEMS,
so micro-electro-mechanical systems,
and really building
these tiny nanostructures
for temperature sensing.
And I just found that to be
just incredibly rewarding
and fascinating subject to just understand
how you can build something
miniature like that
that again served a
function and had a purpose.
And then I spent large
majority of my college years
basically building
millimeter wave circuits
for next gen telecommunication
systems, for imaging.
And it was just something that I found
very, very intellectually interesting.
Phase arrays, how the
signal processing works
for any modern as well as next
gen telecommunication system,
wireless and wireline.
EM waves or electromagnetic
waves are fascinating.
How do you design antennas
that are most efficient
in a small footprint that you have?
How do you make these
things energy-efficient?
That was something that just consumed
my intellectual curiosity.
And that journey led
me to actually apply to
and find myself at a PhD
program at UC Berkeley
at kind of this consortium called
the Berkeley Wireless Research Center
that was precisely looking at building,
at the time, we called it xg,
similar to 3G, 4G, 5G,
but the next, next generation G system,
and how you would design
circuits around that
to ultimately go on phones
and basically any other devices
that are wirelessly connected these days.
So I was just absolutely just fascinated
by how that entire system works
and that infrastructure works.
And then also during grad
school, I had sort of the fortune
of having couple research fellowships
that led me to pursue
whatever project that I want.
And that's one of the things that
I really enjoyed about my
graduate school career,
where you got to kind of pursue
your intellectual curiosity
and the domain that may not
matter at the end of the day,
but it's something that really allows you
the opportunity to go
as deeply as you want,
as well as as widely as you want.
And at the time, I was actually
working on this project
called the Smart Bandaid,
and the idea was that
when you get a wound,
there's a lot of other
kind of proliferation of signaling pathway
that cells follow to close that wound.
And there were hypotheses
that when you apply
external electric field,
you can actually accelerate
the closing of that field
by having basically
electro taxing of the cells
around that wound site.
And specifically, not
just for normal wound,
there are chronic wounds that don't heal.
So we were interested in building
some sort of wearable
patch that you could apply
to kind of facilitate
that healing process.
And that was in collaboration
with Professor Michel Maharbiz,
which was a great addition to
kind of my thesis committee
and it really shaped the
rest of my PhD career.
- So this would be the first time
you interacted with biology, I suppose.
- Correct, correct.
I mean, there were some peripheral
end application of the wireless imaging
and telecommunication
system that I was using
for security and bio imaging,
but this was a very clear
direct application to
biology and biological system
and understanding the
constraints around that
and really designing and engineering
electrical solutions around it.
So that was my first introduction,
and that's also kind of how
I got introduced to Michel.
He's sort of known for
remote control of beetles
in the early 2000s.
And then around 2013, obviously
kind of the holy grail
when it comes to implantable system
is to kind of understand how
small of a thing you can make,
and a lot of that is
driven by how much energy
or how much power you can supply to it
and how you extract data from it.
So at the time at Berkeley,
there was kind of this desire
to kind of understand in the neural space
what sort of system you can build
to really miniaturize
these implantable systems.
And I distinctively remember
this one particular meeting
where Michel came in and he's like,
"Guys, I think I have a solution."
The solution is ultrasound.
And then he proceeded
to kind of walk through
why that is the case, and
that really formed the basis
for my thesis work
called neural dust system
that was looking at ways to use ultrasound
as opposed to electromagnetic waves
for powering as well as communication.
I guess I should step back and say
the initial goal of the project
was to build these tiny,
about a size of a neuron
implantable system
that can be parked next to a neuron,
being able to record its state
and being able to ping that
back to the outside world
for doing something useful.
And as I mentioned, the size
of the implantable system
is limited by how you power the thing
and get the data off of it.
And at the end of the day, fundamentally,
if you look at a human body,
we're essentially a bag of salt water,
with some interesting
proteins and chemicals,
but it's mostly salt water
that's very, very well
temperature-regulated
at 37 degrees Celsius.
And we'll get into how, and later,
why that's an extremely harsh environment
for any electronics to survive,
as I'm sure you've experienced
or maybe not experienced
dropping cell phone in a
salt water in an ocean.
It will instantly kill the device, right?
But anyways, just in general,
electromagnetic waves don't penetrate
through this environment well.
And just the speed of
light, it is what it is.
We can't change it.
And based on the wavelength
at which you are interfacing
with the device, the device
just needs to be big.
Like these inductors
needs to be quite big.
And the general good rule of thumb is that
you want the wavefront to
be roughly on the order
of the size of the thing
that you're interfacing with.
So an implantable system that is around
10 to 100 micron in dimension in a volume,
which is about the size of a neuron
that you see in a human body,
you would have to operate at
like hundreds of gigahertz,
which number one, not only is it difficult
to build electronics operating
at those frequencies,
but also, the body just attenuates that
very, very significantly.
So the interesting kind of
insight of this ultrasound
was the fact that ultrasound just travels
a lot more effectively
in the human body tissue
compared to electromagnetic waves.
And this is something that you encounter,
and I'm sure most people have encountered
in their lives when you go to hospitals
that are medical ultrasound
sonograph, right?
And they go into very, very deep depth
without attenuating
too much of the signal.
So all in all, ultrasound,
the fact that it travels
through the body extremely well
and the mechanism to which
it travels to the body
really well is that just the
wavefront is very different.
Its electromagnetic waves are transverse,
whereas ultrasound waves are compressive.
So it's just a completely different mode
of wavefront propagation,
and as well as speed of sound
is orders and orders of magnitude
less than speed of light,
which means that even at 10
megahertz ultrasound wave,
your wavefront ultimately is
a very, very small wavelength.
So if you're talking about interfacing
with the 10 micron or 100
micron type structure,
you would have 150 micron
wavefront at 10 megahertz.
And building electronics
at those frequencies
are much, much, much easier
and they're a lot more efficient.
So the basic idea kind of was
born out of using ultrasound
as a mechanism for powering the device,
and then also getting data back.
So now the question is, how
do you get the data back?
The mechanism to which we landed on
is what's called backscattering.
This is actually something
that is very common
and that we interface
on a day-to-day basis
with our RFID cards, our
radio frequency ID tag,
where there's actually rarely,
in your ID, a battery inside.
There's an antenna and
there's some sort of coil
that has your serial identification ID
and then there's an external device
called a reader that
then sends a wavefront,
and then you reflect back that wavefront
with some sort of modulation
that's unique to your ID.
That's what's called
backscattering, fundamentally.
So the tag itself actually
doesn't have to consume that much energy.
And that was a mechanism to which we were
kind of thinking about
sending the data back.
So when you have an external
ultrasonic transducer
that's sending ultrasonic
wave to your implant,
the neuro dust implant,
and it records some information
about its environment,
whether it's a neuron
firing or some other state
of the tissue that it's interfacing with,
and then it just amplitude modulates
the wavefront that comes
back to the source.
- And the recording step
would be the only one
that requires any energy?
So what would require
energy in that low step?
- Correct, so it is that initial
kind of startup circuitry
to get that recording, amplifying it,
and then just modulating.
And the mechanism that you can enable that
is there is this specialized crystal
called piezoelectric crystals
that are able to convert
sound energy into electrical
energy and vice versa.
So you can kind of have this interplay
between the ultrasonic domain
and electrical domain that
is the biological tissue.
- So on the theme of parking very small
computational devices next
to neurons, that's the dream,
the vision of brain computer interfaces.
Maybe before we talk about Neuralink,
can you give a sense of the
history of the field of BCI?
What has been maybe the continued dream,
and also some of the
milestones along the way
with the different approaches
and the amazing work
done at the various labs?
- I think a good starting
point is going back to 1790s.
(Lex laughs)
- I did not expect that.
- Where the concept of animal electricity
or the fact that body is electric
was first discovered by Luigi Galvani,
where he had this famous experiment
where he connected set
of electrodes to frog leg
and ran current through it,
and then it started twitching,
and he said, "Oh my goodness,
the body's electric."
So fast forward many, many years to 1920s
where Hans Berger, who's
German psychiatrist
discovered EEG or electroencephalography,
which is still around.
There are these electrode
arrays that you wear
outside the skull that gives you some
sort of neural recording.
That was a very, very big milestone
that you can record
some sort of activities
about the human mind.
And then in the 1940s, there
were these group of scientists,
Renshaw, Forbes, and
Morrison that inserted
these glass micro
electrodes into the cortex
and recorded single neurons.
The fact that there's signal
that are a bit more high resolution
and high fidelity as you get closer
to the source, let's say.
And in the 1950s, these two scientists,
Hodgkin and Huxley showed up,
and they built this
beautiful, beautiful models
of the cell membrane
and the ionic mechanism
and had these like circuit diagram.
And as someone who's an electric engineer,
it's a beautiful model that's
built out of these partial
differential equations,
talking about flow of ions,
and how that really leads
to how neurons communicate.
And they won the Nobel Prize for that
10 years later in the 1960s.
So in 1969, Eb Fetz from
University of Washington,
published this beautiful paper called
Operating Conditioning of
Cortical Unit Activity,
where he was able to record
a single unit neuron from a monkey
and was able to have the monkey modulated
based on its activity and reward system.
So I would say this is the
very, very first example,
as far as I'm aware, of as closed loop
brain computer interface or BCI.
- The abstract reads, "The
activity of single neurons
in precentral cortex
of anesthetized monkeys
was conditioned by reinforcing high rates
of neuronal discharge with
delivery of a food pellet.
Auditory and visual feedback
of unit firing rates
was usually provided in
addition to food reinforcement."
Cool, so they actually got it done.
- They got it done.
This is back in 1969.
- "After several training sessions,
monkeys could increase the
activity of newly isolated cells
by 50 to 500% above rates
before reinforcement."
Fascinating.
- Brain is very plastic.
(Lex laughs)
- And so from here, the
number of experiments grew.
- Yeah, number of experiments
as well as set of tools
to interface with the
brain have just exploded.
I think, and also, just
understanding the neural code
and how some of the cortical layers
and the functions are organized.
So the other paper that is pretty seminal,
especially in the the motor decoding
was this paper in the
1980s from Georgopoulos
that discovered that
there's this thing called
motor tuning curve.
So what are motor tuning curves?
It's the fact that there are neurons
in the motor cortex of
mammals, including humans,
that have a preferential direction
that causes them to fire.
So what that means is
there are a set of neurons
that would increase
their spiking activities
when you're thinking
about moving to the left,
right, up, down, and any of those vectors.
And based on that, you
could start to think,
well, if you can't identify
those essential eigenvectors,
you can do a lot, and you can actually use
that information for actually decoding
someone's intended
movement from the cortex.
So that was a very, very seminal
kind of paper that showed
that there is some sort
of code you can extract,
especially in the motor cortex.
- So there's signal there.
And if you measure the
electrical signal from the brain,
that you could actually figure
out what the intention was.
- Correct, yeah, not
only electrical signals,
but electrical signals from
the right set of neurons
that give you these
preferential direction.
- Hmm.
Okay, so going slowly towards Neuralink,
one interesting question
is what do we understand
on the BCI front on invasive
versus non-invasive?
From this line of work,
how important is it
to park next to the neuron?
What does that get you?
- That answer fundamentally depends
on what you want to do with it, right?
There's actually incredible
amount of stuff that you can do
with EEG and electrocardiograph, ECoG,
which actually doesn't penetrate
the cortical layer or parenchyma,
but you place a set of electrodes
on the surface of the brain.
So the thing that I'm
personally very interested in
is just actually understanding
and being able to just really
tap into the high
resolution, high fidelity
understanding of the activities
that are happening at the local level.
And we can get into biophysics,
but just to kind of step
back to kind of use analogy,
'cause analogy here can be useful,
and sometimes, it's a little bit difficult
to think about electricity.
At the end of the day, we're
doing electrical recording
that's mediated by ionic currents,
movements of these charged particles,
which is really, really hard
for most people to think about.
But turns out, a lot of the activities
that are happening in the brain
and the frequency bandwidth,
which starts happening
is actually very, very
similar to sound waves,
and in our normal
conversation, audible range.
So the analogy that typically
is used in the field is,
if you have a football stadium,
there's game going on.
If you stand outside the stadium,
you maybe get a sense
of how the game is going
based on the cheers and the
booze of the home crowd,
whether the team is winning or not.
But you have absolutely
no idea what the score is.
You have absolutely no idea
what individual audience
or the players are talking
or saying to each other,
what the next play is,
what the next goal is.
So what you have to do is you
have to drop the microphone
near into the stadium and
then get near the source,
like into the individual chatter.
In this specific example,
you would wanna have it
right next to where
the huddle's happening.
So I think that's kind
of a good illustration
of what we're trying to do
when we say invasive or minimally invasive
or implanted brain computer interfaces
versus non-invasive or
non-implanted brain interfaces.
It's basically talking about
where do you put that microphone,
and what can you do with that information.
- So what is the biophysics
of the read and write
communication that we're
talking about here,
as we now step into the
efforts at Neuralink?
- Yeah, so brain is made up
of these specialized cells called neurons.
There's billions of
them, tens of billions.
Sometimes, people call
it a hundred billion
that are connected in this
complex yet dynamic network
that are constantly remodeling.
They're changing their synaptic weights,
and that's what we typically
call neuroplasticity.
And the neurons are also bathed
in this charged environment
that is latent with
many charged molecules,
like potassium ions,
sodium ions, chlorine ions.
And those actually facilitate
these through ionic current,
communication between
these different networks.
And when you look at a neuron as well,
they have these membrane
with a beautiful, beautiful
protein structure called the
voltage selective ion channels,
which, in my opinion, is one
of nature's best inventions.
In many ways, if you
think about what they are,
they're doing the job of
a modern day transistors.
Transistors are nothing
more, at the end of the day,
than a voltage-gated conduction channel.
And nature found a way to have that
very, very early on in its evolution.
And as we all know, with the transistor,
you can have many, many computation
and a lot of amazing things
that we have access to today.
So I think it's one of
those, just as a tangent,
just a beautiful, beautiful invention
that the nature came up with,
these voltage-gated ion channels.
- I mean, I suppose there's,
on the biological level,
every level of the
complexity of the hierarchy
of the organism, there's
going to be some mechanisms
for storing information
and for doing computation.
And this is just one such way.
But to do that with biological
and chemical components is interesting.
Plus like when neurons, I mean,
it's not just electricity,
it's chemical communication,
it's also mechanical.
I mean, these are like
actual objects that vibrate.
I mean, they move-
- Yeah, they're actually,
I mean, there's a lot of really,
really interesting physics
that are involved in, you know,
kind of going back to
my work on ultrasound
during grad school, there are groups,
and there were groups,
and there are still groups
looking at ways to cause
neurons to actually fire
an action potential using ultrasound wave.
And the mechanism to
which that's happening
is still unclear as I understand.
It may just be that you're imparting
some sort of thermal energy
and that causes cells
to depolarize in some interesting ways.
But there are also these ion channels
or even membranes that
actually just open up its pore
as there are being
mechanically shook, right?
Vibrated.
So there's just a lot of elements
of these like move particles, which again,
like that's governed by
diffusion physics, right?
Movements of particles.
And there's also a lot of kind
of interesting physics there.
- Also, not to mention, as
Roger Penrose talks about,
there might be some beautiful weirdness
in the quantum mechanical
effects of all of this.
And he actually believes
that consciousness
might emerge from the quantum
mechanical effects there.
So like there's physics, there's
chemistry, there's biology,
all of that is going on there.
- Oh yeah, yeah.
I mean, you can, yes,
there's a lot of levels of
physics that you can dive into.
But yeah, in the end,
you have these membranes
with these voltage-gated ion
channels that selectively
let these charge molecules
that are in the extracellular
matrix like in and out.
And these neurons generally
have these like resting potential
where there's a voltage difference
between inside the cell
and outside the cell.
And when there's some sort
of stimuli that changes
the state such that they
need to send information
to the downstream network,
you start to kind of see
these like sort of orchestration
of these different molecules
going in and out of these channels.
They also open up, like
more of them open up
once it reaches some threshold
to a point where you
have a depolarizing cell
that sends action potential.
So it's a just a very beautiful
kind of orchestration of these molecules.
And what we're trying to do
when we place an electrode
or parking it next to a neuron
is that you're trying to measure
these local changes in the potential.
Again, mediated by the
movements of the ions.
And what's interesting,
as I mentioned earlier,
there's a lot of physics involved.
And the two dominant physics
for this electrical recording domain
is diffusion physics and electromagnetism.
And where one dominates,
where Maxwell's equation dominates
versus fixed law dominates depends on
where your electrode is.
If it's close to the source,
mostly electromagnetic-based,
when you're farther away from
it, it's more diffusion-based.
So essentially, when you're
able to park it next to it,
you can listen in on
those individual chatter
and those local changes in the potential,
and the type of signal that you get
are these canonical textbook
neural spiking waveform.
The moment you're further away,
and based on some of the
studies that people have done,
Christof Koch's lab and others,
once you're away from that source
by roughly around a hundred micron,
which is about a width of a human hair,
you no longer hear from that neuron.
Or you're no longer able
to kind of have the system
sensitive enough to be able
to record that particular
local membrane potential
change in that neuron.
And just to kind of give
you a sense of scale also,
when you look at a hundred micron voxel,
so a hundred micron by a hundred micron
by a hundred micron box in a brain tissue,
there's roughly around 40 neurons
and whatever number of
connections that they have.
So there's a lot in that volume of tissue.
So the moment you're outside of that,
there's just no hope that you'll be able
to detect that change from
that one specific neuron
that you may care about.
- Yeah, but as you're
moving about this space,
you'll be hearing other ones.
So if you move another 100 micron,
you'll be hearing chatter
from another community.
- Correct.
- And so the whole
sense is you wanna place
as many as possible electrodes
and then you're listening to the chatter.
- Yeah, you wanna listen to the chatter.
And at the end of the day, you also want
to basically let the software
do the job of decoding.
And just to kind of go to,
why ECOG and EEG work at all, right?
When you have these
local changes, obviously,
it's not just this one
neuron that's activating.
There's many, many other networks
that are activating all the time.
And you do see sort of a general change
in the potential of this
electro, like this charge medium,
and that's what you're recording
when you're farther away.
I mean, you still have
some reference electrode
that's stable in the brain
that's just electroactive organ,
and you're seeing some
combination aggregate
action potential changes and
then you can pick it up, right?
It's a much slower changing signals.
But there are these like canonical
kind of oscillations and waves,
like gamma waves, beta waves.
Like when you sleep, that can be detected,
'cause there's sort of a synchronized
kind of global effect of the
brain that you can detect.
And I mean, the physics of this go,
I mean, if we really wanna
go down that rabbit hole,
like there's a lot that
goes on in terms of
like why diffusion physics
at some point dominates
when you're further away from the source.
It's just a charged medium.
So similar to how when you
have electromagnetic ways
propagating in atmosphere
or in a charged medium like a plasma,
there's this weird shielding
that happens that actually
further attenuates the signal
as you move away from it.
So yeah, you see, like if you do
a really, really deep dive
on kind of the signal
attenuation over distance,
you start to see kind
of one of where square
in the beginning, and
then exponential drop off.
And that's the knee at which you go from
electromagnet magnetism dominating
to diffusion physics dominating.
- But once again, with the
electrodes, the biophysics,
you need to understand it's not as deep,
because no matter where
you're placing that,
you're listening to a small
crowd of local neurons.
- Correct, yeah.
So once you penetrate the brain,
you're in the arena, so to speak.
- And there's a lot of neurons.
- [DJ] There are many, many of 'em.
- But then again, there's a
whole field of neuroscience
that's studying like how
the different groupings,
the different sections of
the seating in the arena,
what they usually are responsible for,
which is where the metaphor
probably falls apart,
'cause the seating is not
that organized in an arena.
- Also, most of them are silent.
They don't really do much,
or their activities are, you know,
you have to hit it with just
the right set of stimulus.
- So they're usually quiet.
- They're usually very quiet.
There's, I mean, similar to
dark energy and dark matter,
there's dark neurons.
What are they all doing?
When you place these electrode, again,
like within this a hundred micron volume,
you have 40 or so neurons.
Like why do you not see 40 neurons?
Why do you see only a handful?
What is happening there?
- Well, they're mostly quiet,
but like when they speak, they
say profound shit, I think.
That's the way I'd like to think about it.
Anyway, before we zoom in
even more, let's zoom out.
So how does Neuralink work?
From the surgery to the implant
to the signal and the decoding process
and the human being
able to use the implant
to actually affect the world outside?
And all of this, I'm asking in the context
of there's a gigantic historic
milestone in Neuralink
just accomplished in January of this year,
putting a Neuralink implant
in the first human being, Noland.
And there's been a lot to talk about there
about his experience,
because he's able to describe
all the nuance and the beauty
and the fascinating
complexity of that experience
of everything involved.
But on the technical level,
how does Neuralink work?
- Yeah, so there are
three major components
to the technology that we're building.
One is the device, the thing
that's actually recording
these neural chatters.
We call it N1 implant or The Link.
And we have a surgical robot
that's actually doing an implantation
of these tiny, tiny wires
that we call threads
that are smaller than human hair.
And once everything is surgirized,
you have these neural signals,
these spiking neurons that
are coming out of the brain
and you need to have some
sort of software to decode
what the users intend to do with that.
So there's what's called
the Neuralink application,
or B1 app that's doing that translation,
is running the very, very
simple machine learning model
that decodes these inputs
that are neural signals
and then convert it to a
set of outputs that allows
our participant, first participant Noland,
to be able to control a cursor on this.
- And this is done wirelessly?
- And this is done wirelessly.
So our implant is actually a two-part.
The link has these flexible
tiny wires called threads
that have multiple
electrodes along its length.
And they're only inserted
into the cortical layer,
which is about three to five
millimeters in a human brain
in the motor cortex region.
That's where the kind of the
intention for movement lies in.
And we have 64 of these threads,
each thread having 16 electrodes along
the span of three to four millimeters,
separated by 200 microns.
So you can actually record along
the depth of the insertion.
And based on that signal,
there's custom integrated circuit
or ASIC that we built that
amplifies the neural signals
that you're recording
and then digitizing it
and then has some mechanism for detecting
whether there was an interesting event
that is a spiking event
and decide to send that,
or not send that through
Bluetooth to an external device,
whether it's a phone or a computer
that's running this Neuralink application.
- So there's onboard
signal processing already
just to decide whether this is
an interesting event or not.
So there is some computational
power on board inside
in addition to the human brain?
- Yeah, so it does the signal processing
to kind of really compress
the amount of signal
that you're recording.
So we have a total of
a thousand electrodes
sampling at just under 20
kilohertz with 10 bit each.
So that's 200 megabits.
That's coming through to the chip,
from thousand channel
simultaneous neural recording.
And that's quite a bit of data.
And there are technology available
to send that off wirelessly,
but being able to do that
in a very, very thermally
constrained environment that is a brain,
so there has to be some amount
of compression that happens
to send off only the
interesting data that you need,
which in this particular case,
for motor decoding is
occurrence of a spike or not.
And then being able to use that
to decode the intended cursor movement.
So the implant itself processes it,
figures out whether a
spike happened or not
with our spike detection algorithm,
and then sends it off, packages it,
sends it off through Bluetooth
to an external device
that then has the model to decode,
okay, based on the spiking inputs,
did Noland wish to go
up, down, left, right,
or click, or right click, or whatever?
- All of this is really fascinating,
but let's stick on the N1 implant itself,
so the thing that's in the brain.
So I'm looking at a picture
of it, there's an enclosure,
there's a charging call,
so we didn't talk about the
charging, which is fascinating.
The battery, the power
electronics, the antenna.
Then there's the signal
processing electronics.
I wonder if there's more kinds
of signal processing you can do.
That's another question.
And then there's the threads themselves
with the enclosure on the bottom.
So maybe to ask about the charging,
so there's a external charging device.
- Mm-hmm, yeah, there's an
external charging device.
So yeah, the second part of the implant,
the threads are the ones, again,
just the last three to five
millimeters are the ones
that are actually penetrating the cortex.
Rest of it is,
actually, most of the volume
is occupied by the battery,
rechargeable battery.
And it's about a size of a quarter.
I actually have a device here,
if you wanna take a look at it.
This is the flexible
threat component of it.
And then this is the implant.
So it's about a size of a U.S. quarter.
It's about nine millimeter thick.
So basically, this implant,
once you have the craniectomy
and the directomy,
threads are inserted,
and the hole that you
created, this craniectomy,
gets replaced with that.
So basically, that thing plugs that hole,
and you can screw in these self-drilling
cranial screws to hold it in place.
And at the end of the day, once
you have the skin flap over,
there's only about two
to three millimeters.
That's obviously transitioning
off of the top of the implant
to where the screws are.
And that's the minor bump that you have.
- Those threads look tiny.
That's incredible.
That is really incredible.
That is really incredible.
And also, you're right,
most of the actual volume is the battery.
Yeah, this is way smaller than I realized.
- They are also, the threads
themselves are quite strong.
- They look strong.
- And the thread themselves
also has a very interesting
feature at the end of it called the loop.
And that's the mechanism
to which the robot
is able to interface and manipulate
this tiny hair-like structure.
- And they're tiny, so
what's the width of a thread?
- Yeah, so the width of a
thread starts from 16 micron
and then tapers out to about 84 micron.
So average human hair is about
80 to 100 micron in width.
- This thing is amazing.
This thing is amazing.
- Yes, most of the volume
is occupied by the battery,
rechargeable lithium ion cell.
And the charging is done
through inductive charging,
which is actually very commonly used.
Most cell phones have that.
The biggest difference is that for us,
usually when you have a phone
and you wanna charge it on a charging pad,
you don't really care how hot it gets,
whereas for us, it matters.
There's a very strict regulation
and good reasons to not actually increase
the surrounding tissue temperature
by two degrees Celsius.
So there's actually a lot of innovation
that is packed into this to allow charging
of this implant without causing
that temperature threshold to reach.
And even small things like,
you see this charging coil
and what's called the
ferrite shield, right?
So without that ferrite shield,
what you end up having
when you have resonant
inductive charging is
that the battery itself
is a metallic can, and you
form these Eddy currents
from external charger
and that causes heating
and that actually contributes
to inefficiency in charging.
So this ferrite shield, what
it does is that it actually
concentrate that field
line away from the battery
and then around the coil that's
actually wrapped around it.
- There's a lot of really
fascinating design here
to make it, I mean, you're
integrating a computer
into a complex biological system.
- Yeah, there's a lot of innovation here.
I would say that part of what enabled this
was just the innovations in the wearable.
There's a lot of really, really powerful,
tiny, low power microcontrollers,
temperature sensors,
or various different sensors
and power electronics.
A lot of innovation really came
in the charging coil design,
how this is packaged, and
how do you enable charging
such that you don't really
exceed that temperature limit,
which is not a constraint
for other devices out there.
- So let's talk about
the threads themselves,
those tiny, tiny, tiny things.
So how many of them are there?
You mentioned a thousand electrodes.
How many threads are there,
and what did the electrodes
have to do with the threads?
- Yeah, so the current instantiation
of the device has 64 threads,
and each thread has 16 electrodes
for a total of 1,024 electrodes
that are capable of both
recording and stimulating.
And the thread is basically
this polymer insulated wire.
The metal conductor is
the kind of tiramisu cake
of ti, plat, gold, plate, ti.
And they're very, very tiny wires.
Two micron in width, so
2/1000000th of meter.
- It's crazy that that
thing I'm looking at
has the polymer installation,
has the conducting material,
and has 16 electrodes at the end of it.
- On each of those threads.
- Yeah, on each of those threads.
- Correct.
- 16, each one of those.
- You're not gonna be able
to see it with naked eyes.
- And I mean, to state the obvious,
or maybe for people
who are just listening,
they're flexible.
- Yes, yes, that's also one element
that was incredibly important for us.
So each of these thread
are, as I mentioned,
16 micron in width and then
they taper to 84 micron,
but in thickness, they're
less than five micron.
And thickness is mostly
polyamide at the bottom
and this metal track and
then another polyamide.
So two micron of polyamide,
400 nanometer of this metal stack,
and two micron of polyamide
sandwiched together
to protect it from the environment
that is 37 degrees C bag of salt water.
- So what's some, maybe
can you speak to some
interesting aspects of
the material design here?
Like what does it take to
design a thing like this
and to be able to
manufacture a thing like this
for people who don't know
anything about this kind of thing?
- Yeah, so the material
selection that we have is not,
I don't think it was particularly unique.
There were other labs
and there are other labs
that are kind of looking
at similar material stack.
There's kind of a fundamental question
and still needs to be
answered around the longevity
and reliability of these
micro electrodes that we call,
compared to some of the
other more conventional,
neural interfaces, devices
that are intracranial.
So penetrating the cortex
that are more rigid,
like the Utah array.
There are these four by four millimeter
kind of silicon shank that have exposed
recording site at the end of it.
And that's been kind of the innovation
from Richard Normann back in 1997.
It's called the Utah Array
'cause he was at University of Utah.
- And what does the Utah array look like?
So it's a rigid type of-
- Yeah, so we can actually look it up.
- Oh.
- Yeah.
(Lex laughing)
Yeah, so it's a bed of needle.
There's-
- (laughs) Yeah.
Okay, go ahead, I'm sorry.
- So those are rigid-
- Rigid, yeah.
You weren't kidding.
- And the size and the
number of shanks vary,
anywhere from 64 to 128.
At the very tip of it
is an exposed electrode
that actually records neural signal.
The other thing that's
interesting to note is that
unlike Neuralink threads that
have recording electrodes
that are actually exposed
iridium oxide recording sites
along the depth, this is
only at a single depth.
So these Utah array spokes can be anywhere
between 0.5 millimeters to 1.5 millimeter.
And they also have
designs that are slanted.
So you can have it inserted
at different depth,
but that's one of the
other big differences.
And then, I mean, the main key
difference is the fact that
there's no active electronics.
These are just electrodes,
and then there's a bundle of
a wire that you're seeing,
and then that actually
then exits the craniectomy
that then has this port
that you can connect to
for any external electronic devices.
They are working on a or have
the wireless telemetry device,
but it still requires
a through the skin port
that actually is one of
the biggest failure modes
for infection for the system.
- What are some of the challenges
associated with flexible threads?
Like for example, on the robotic side,
R1, implanting those threads,
how difficult does that task?
- Yeah, so as you mentioned,
they're very, very difficult
to maneuver by hand.
These Utah arrays that you saw earlier,
they're actually inserted
by a neurosurgeon
actually positioning it near
the site that they want.
And then there's a pneumatic hammer
that actually pushes them in.
So it's a pretty simple process,
and they're easy to maneuver.
But for these thin film arrays,
they're very, very tiny and flexible.
So they're very difficult to maneuver.
So that's why we built an
entire robot to do that.
There are other reasons
for why we built a robot,
and that is ultimately,
we want this to help
millions and millions of people
that can benefit from this.
And there just aren't that
many neurosurgeons out there.
And robots can be something that
we hope can actually do
large parts of the surgery.
But yeah, the robot is this
entire other sort of category
of product that we're working on.
And it's essentially this
multi-axis gantry system
that has the specialized robot head
that has all of the optics
and this kind of a needle
retracting mechanism
that maneuvers these threads
via this loop structure
that you have on the thread.
- So the thread already
has a loop structure
by which you can grab it?
- Correct, correct.
- Okay.
So this is fascinating.
So you mentioned optics,
so there's a robot - R1.
So for now, there's a
human that actually creates
a hole in the skull.
- Mm-hmm.
- And then after that, there's
a computer vision component
that's finding a way to
avoid the blood vessels.
And then you're grabbing it by the loop,
each individual thread and placing it
in a particular location
to avoid the blood vessels.
And also choosing the depth of placement,
all that?
- Correct.
So controlling every,
like the 3D geometry of the placement?
- Correct.
So the aspect of this robot that is unique
is that it's not surgeon-assisted
or human-assisted.
It's a semi-automatic or automatic robot.
Obviously, there are
human component to it,
when you're placing targets.
You can always move it away
from kind of major vessels that you see.
But I mean, we wanna get
to a point where one click
and it just does the
surgery within minutes.
- So the computer vision
component finds great targets,
candidates and the human
kind of approves them
and the robot does,
does it do like one thread at a time
or does it do one-
- It does one thread
at a time, and that's
actually also one thing
that we are looking at ways
to do multiple threads at a time.
There's nothing stopping from it.
You can have multiple kind
of engagement mechanisms,
but right now, it's one by one.
And we also still do quite a bit
of just kind of verification
to make sure that it got inserted.
If so, how deep?
Did it actually match
what was programmed in
and so on and so forth?
- And the actual electrode
is a place that vary
at differing depths in the like, I mean,
it's very small differences,
but differences.
- [DJ] Yeah, yeah.
- And so that there's some
reasoning behind that,
as you mentioned.
Like it gets more varied signal.
- Yeah, I mean, we try to place them all
around three or four
millimeter from the surface,
just 'cause the span of the electrode,
those 16 electrodes that we
currently have in this version
spans roughly around three millimeters.
So we wanna get all of those in the brain.
- This is fascinating.
Okay, so there's a million questions here.
If we could zoom in
specifically on the electrodes,
so what is your sense,
how many neurons is each
individual electrode listening to?
- Yeah, each electrode
can record from anywhere
between 0 to 40, as I
mentioned, right, earlier.
But tactically speaking,
we only see about,
at most, like two to three.
And you can actually
distinguish which neuron
it's coming from by the
shape of the spikes.
- [Lex] Oh, cool.
- So I mentioned the spike
detection algorithm that we have.
It's called BOSS algorithm,
buffer online, spike sorter.
- Nice.
- It actually outputs
at the end of the day
six unique values, which
are kind of the amplitude
of these like negative
going hump, middle hump,
like positive going hump,
and then also the time
at which these happen.
And from that, you can have a kind of
a statistical probability
estimation of, is that a spike?
Is it not a spike?
And then based on that,
you could also determine,
oh, that spike looks
different than that spike.
Must have come from a different neuron.
- Okay, so that's a nice
signal processing step
from which you can then
make much better predictions
about if there's a spike.
- Yeah.
- Especially in this kind of context
where there could be
multiple neurons screaming.
And that also results in you being able
to compress the data
better in the (indistinct).
Okay.
- And just to be clear,
I mean, the labs do what's
called spike sorting.
Usually, once you have
these like broadband,
the fully digitized signals
and then you run a bunch of different set
of algorithms to kind of tease apart,
it's just all of this for
us is done on the device.
- On the device.
- In a very low power,
custom built ASIC digital processing unit.
- [Lex] Highly heat constrained?
- Highly heat constrained,
and the processing time
from signal going in
and giving you the output
is less than a microsecond,
which is a very, very
short amount of time.
- Oh yeah, so the latency
has to be super short.
- Correct.
- Oh wow.
Oh, that's a pain in the ass.
- Yeah, latency is this huge, huge thing
that you have to deal with.
Right now, the biggest source of latency
comes from the Bluetooth,
the way in which they're packetized
and we bend them in 15 millisecond.
- Oh, interesting, it says
communication constraint.
Is there some potential innovation there
on the protocol used?
- Absolutely.
- Okay.
- Yeah, Bluetooth is definitely not
our final wireless communication protocol
that we wanna get to.
- Hence the N1 and the R1.
I imagine that increases-
- NxRx.
- Yeah, that's the communication protocol,
'cause Bluetooth allows you to communicate
I guess farther distances
than you need to,
so you can go much shorter.
- Yeah, well, the primary motivation
for choosing Bluetooth is that,
I mean, everything has Bluetooth.
- All right, you can talk to any device.
- Interoperability is
just absolutely essential,
especially in this early phase.
And in many ways, if
you can access a phone
or a computer, you can do anything.
- Well, it'll be interesting to step back
and actually look at, again,
the same pipeline that
you mentioned for Noland.
So what does this whole process look like?
From finding and selecting a
human being to the surgery,
to the first time he's
able to use this thing?
- So we have what's called
the patient registry
that people can sign up to
hear more about the updates.
And that was a route to
which Noland applied.
And the process is that once
the application comes in,
it contains some medical records,
and based on their medical eligibility,
that there's a lot of different
inclusion-exclusion
criteria for them to meet.
And we go through a
prescreening interview process
with someone from Neuralink.
And at some point, we
also go out to their homes
to do a BCI home audit,
'cause one of the most
kind of revolutionary part
about having this N1 system
that is completely wireless
is that you can use it at home.
Like you don't actually
have to go to the lab
and go to the clinic to get connecterized
to these like specialized equipment
that you can't take home with you.
So that's one of the key elements
of when we're designing the system
that we wanted to keep in mind,
like people hopefully would
wanna be able to use this
every day in the comfort of their homes.
And so part of our engagement
and what we're looking
for during BCI home audit
is to just kind of
understand their situation,
what other assistive
technology that they use.
- And we should also step
back and kind of say that
the estimate is 180,000
people live with quadriplegia
in the United States, and each year,
an additional 18,000 suffer a
paralyzing spinal cord injury.
So these are folks who
have a lot of challenges,
living a life in terms of accessibility,
in terms of doing the
things that many of us
just take for granted day to day.
And one of the things, one
of the goals of this initial
study is to enable them to
have sort of digital autonomy,
where they by themselves can
interact with a digital device
using just their mind,
something that you're calling telepathy.
So digital telepathy, where a
quadriplegic can communicate
with a digital device
in all the ways that
we've been talking about.
Control the mouse cursor,
enough to be able to
do all kinds of stuff,
including play games and tweet
and all that kind of stuff.
And there's a lot of people for whom life,
the basics of life are difficult,
because of the things that
have happened to them.
- Yeah, I mean, movement is so
fundamental to our existence.
I mean, even speaking involves movement
of mouth, lip, larynx.
And without that, it's
extremely debilitating.
And there are many, many
people that we can help.
And I mean, like especially if you start
to kind of look at other
forms of movement disorders
that are not just from spinal cord injury,
but from ALS, MS, or even
stroke and/or just aging, right?
That leads you to lose
some of that mobility,
that independence, it's
extremely debilitating.
- And all of these are
opportunities to help people,
to help alleviate suffering,
to help improve the quality of life.
But each of the things you mentioned
is its own little puzzle
that needs to have increasing
levels of capability
from a device like a Neuralink device.
And so the first one
you're focusing on is,
it's just a beautiful word, telepathy.
So being able to
communicate using your mind
wirelessly with a digital device.
Can you just explain exactly
what we're talking about?
- Yeah, I mean, it's exactly that.
I mean, I think if you are
able to control a cursor
and able to click and
be able to get access
to computer or phone,
I mean, the whole world opens up to you.
And I mean, I guess the word telepathy,
if you kind of think about that
as just definitionally
being able to transfer
information from my brain to your brain
without using some of the
physical faculties that we have,
like voices.
- But the interesting thing here is,
I think the thing that's
not obviously clear
is how exactly it works.
So in order to move a cursor,
there's at least a couple
ways of doing that.
So one is you imagine
yourself maybe moving a mouse
with your hand, or you can
then, which Noland talked about,
like imagine moving the
cursor with your mind.
But it's like there is
a cognitive step here
that's fascinating, 'cause
you have to use the brain
and you have to learn
how to use the brain.
And you kind of have to
figure it out dynamically.
Because you reward yourself if it works.
I mean, there's a step that,
this is just a fascinating step,
'cause you have to get the brain
to start firing in the right way.
And you do that by imagining.
Like fake it till you make it. (laughs)
And all of a sudden, it creates
the right kind of signal
that if decoded correctly,
can create the kind of effect.
And then there's like noise around that,
you have to figure all of that out.
But on the human side,
imagine the cursor moving
is what you have to do.
- Yeah, he says using the force.
- The force.
I mean, isn't that just
like fascinating to you
that it works?
Like to me, it's like, holy
shit, that actually works.
Like you could move a
cursor with your mind.
- As much as you're
learning to use that thing,
that thing's also learning about you.
Like our model is constantly
updating the weights
to say, "Oh, if someone is thinking about
this sophisticated forms
of like spiking patterns,
like that actually means
to do this, right?"
- So the machine is
learning about the human
and the human is learning
about the machine.
So there is a adaptability
to the signal processing,
the decoding step.
And then there's the adaptation
of Noland, the human being.
Like the same way, if you give
me a new mouse and I move it,
I learn very quickly
about its sensitivity,
so I learn to move it slower.
And then there's other
kinds of signal drift
and all that kind of stuff
they have to adapt to.
So both are adapting to each other.
- [DJ] Correct.
- That's a fascinating
like software challenge
on both sides, the software on both,
the human software and-
- The organic and the inorganic.
- The organic and the inorganic.
Anyway, so sorry to rudely interrupt.
So there's this selection
that Noland has passed with flying colors.
So everything including that the,
it's a BCI-friendly home, all of that.
So what is the process of
the surgery implantation,
the first moment when he
gets to use the system?
- The end to end, we say
patient end to patient out,
is anywhere between two to four hours.
In particular case for Noland,
it was about three and a half hours.
And there's many steps
leading to the actual
robot insertion, right?
So there's anesthesia induction,
and we do intra-op CT imaging
to make sure that we're drilling the hole
in the right location.
And this is also pre-planned beforehand.
Someone like Nolan would go through fMRI,
and then they can think
about wiggling their hand.
And obviously, due to their injury,
it's not gonna actually lead
to any sort of intended output.
But it's the same part of the brain
that actually lights up
when you're imagining
moving your finger to
actually moving your finger.
And that's one of the ways
in which we can actually
know where to place our threads,
'cause we wanna go into what's called
a hand knob area in the motor cortex.
And as much as possible,
densely put our electro threads.
So yeah, we do intra-op CT imaging
to make sure and double check
the location of the craniectomy.
And surgeon comes in, does their thing
in terms of like skin
incision, craniectomy,
so drilling of the skull,
and then there's many
different layers of the brain.
There's what's called a dura,
which is a very, very thick
layer that surrounds the brain,
that gets actually resected in
a process called atherectomy.
And that then exposed the pia in the brain
that you wanna insert.
And by the time it's been around
anywhere between one to
one and a half hours,
robot comes in, does its thing,
placement of the targets,
inserting of the thread.
That takes anywhere
between 20 to 40 minutes.
In the particular case for Noland,
it was just under or it
was just over 30 minutes.
And then after that, the surgeon comes in.
There's a couple other steps
of like actually inserting
the dural substitute layer
to protect the thread
as well as the brain.
And then yeah, screw in the
implant and then skin flap
and then suture and then you're out.
- So when Noland woke
up, what was that like?
What's the recovery like,
and when was the first
time he was able to use it?
- So he was actually
immediately, after the surgery,
like an hour after the
surgery as he was waking up,
we did turn on the device,
make sure that we are
recording neural signals,
and we actually did have a couple signals
that we notice that he
can actually modulate.
And what I mean by modulate is that
he can think about crunching his fist,
and you could see the
spike disappear and appear.
(Lex laughing)
- That's awesome.
- And that was immediate, right?
Immediate after in the recovery room.
- How cool is that?
- Yeah.
- That's a human being.
I mean, what did that feel like for you?
This device and a human being,
a first step of a gigantic journey?
I mean, it's a historic moment.
Even just that spike, just
to be able to modulate that.
- Obviously, there have been
other, as you mentioned,
pioneers that have participated
in these groundbreaking BCI
investigational early feasibility studies.
So we're obviously standing
in the shoulders of the giants here.
We're not the first ones to actually
put electrodes in the human brain.
But I mean, just leading
up to the surgery,
I definitely could not sleep.
It's the first time that you're working
in a completely new environment.
We had a lot of confidence
based on our benchtop testing
or preclinical R&D studies
that the mechanism,
the threads, the insertion,
all that stuff is very safe,
and that it's obviously ready
for doing this in a human,
but there's still a lot of unknown unknown
about can the needle actually insert?
I mean, we brought
something like 40 needles
just in case they break, and
we ended up using only one.
But I mean, that was a level
of just complete unknown, right?
'Cause it's a very, very
different environment.
And I mean, that's why we do
clinical trial in the first place
to be able to test these things out.
So extreme nervousness
and just many, many sleepless night
leading up to the surgery
and definitely the day before the surgery,
and it was an early morning surgery.
Like we started at seven in the morning.
And by the time, it was around 10:30.
Everything was done.
But I mean, first time seeing that,
well, number one, just huge relief
that this thing is doing
what it's supposed to do.
And two, I mean, just
immense amount of gratitude
for Noland and his family,
and then many others that have applied
and that we've spoken to and will speak to
are, I mean, true pioneers everywhere.
And I sort of call them
the neural astronauts or neuralnaut.
These amazing, just
like in the '60s, right?
Like these amazing just pioneers, right?
Exploring the unknown outwards.
In this case, it's inward.
But incredible amount
of gratitude for them
to just participate and play a part.
And it's a journey that
we're embarking on together.
But also like, I think it was just,
that was an very, very
important milestone,
but our work was just starting.
So a lot of just kind of anticipation for,
okay, what needs to happen next?
What are set of sequences of events
that needs to happen for
us to make it worthwhile
for both Noland as well as us?
- Just to linger on that, just
a huge congratulations to you
and the team for that milestone.
I know there's a lot of work left,
but that's really exciting to see.
That's a source of hope.
It's this first big step,
opportunity to help hundreds
of thousands of people
and then maybe expand
the realm of the possible
for the human mind for millions
of people in the future.
So it's really exciting.
So like the opportunities
are all ahead of us,
and to do that safely and
to do that effectively
was really fun to see.
As an engineer just watching
other engineers come together
and do an epic thing, that was awesome.
Huge congrats.
- Thank you, thank you.
Yeah, could not have
done it without the team.
And yeah, I mean, that's the other thing
that I told the team as well,
of just this immense sense
of optimism for the future.
I mean, it's a very important
moment for the company,
needless to say, as well as hopefully
for many others out
there that we can help.
- So speaking of challenges,
Neuralink published a blog post
describing that some of
the threads retracted.
And so the performance,
as measured by bits per
second dropped at first,
but then eventually, it was regained.
And that the whole story
of how it was regained
is super interesting.
That's definitely something I'll talk
to Bliss and to Noland about.
But in general, can you speak
to this whole experience?
How was the performance regained
and just the technical
aspects of the threads
being retracted and moving?
- The main takeaway is that in the end,
the performance have come back
and it's actually gotten
better than it was before.
He's actually just beat the
world record yet again last week
to 8.5 BPS, so I mean,
he's just cranking and
he's just improving.
- [Lex] The previous one
that he set was eight.
- Correct.
- He said 8.5.
- Yeah, the previous world
record in human was 4.6.
- Yeah.
- So it's almost double.
And his goal is to try to get to 10,
which is roughly around kind of the median
Neuralinker using a mouse with the hand.
So it's getting there.
- So yeah, so the
performance was regained.
- Yeah, better than before.
So that's a story on its own of what took
the BCI team to recover that performance.
It was actually mostly on
kind of the signal processing.
And so as I mentioned,
we were kind of looking
at these spike outputs
from our electrodes.
And what happened is
that kind of four weeks
into the surgery, we
noticed that the threads
have solely come out of the brain.
And the way in which we noticed
this, at first obviously,
is that, well, I think Noland
was the first to notice
that his performance was degrading.
And I think at the time,
we were also trying to do
a bunch of different experimentation,
different algorithms,
different sort of UI/UX.
So it was expected that
there will be variability
in the performance, but we did
see kind of a steady decline.
And then also, the way in
which we measure the health
of the electrodes or whether
they're in the brain or not,
is by measuring impedance
of the electrode.
So we look at kind of the interfacial,
kind of the Randall circuit, they say,
the capacitance and the resistance
between the electrosurface and the medium.
And if that changes in some dramatic ways,
we have some indication.
Or if you're not seeing
spikes on those channels,
you have some indications that
something's happening there.
And what we notice is that
looking at those impedance plot
and spike rate plots,
and also because we have
those electrodes
recording along the depth,
you are seeing some sort of movement
that indicated that the
rest were being pulled out.
And that obviously will
have an implication
on the model side, because
if the number of inputs
that are going into the model is changing,
'cause you have less of them,
that model needs to get updated, right?
But there were still
signals, and as I mentioned,
similar to how, even when
you place the signals
on the surface of the
brain, or farther away,
like outside the skull, you
still see some useful signals.
What we started looking at is
not just the spike occurrence
through this BOSS
algorithm that I mentioned,
but we started looking at just the power
of the frequency band that is interesting
for Noland to be able to modulate.
So once we kind of change the algorithm
for the implant to not just
give you the BOSS output,
but also these spike band power output,
that helped us sort of, we find the model
with the new set of inputs,
and that was the thing
that really ultimately gave
us the performance back.
In terms of, and obviously,
like the thing that we want
ultimately, and the thing
that we are working towards,
is figuring out ways in which we can keep
those threads intact
for as long as possible
so that we have many more
channels going into the model.
That's by far the number one priority
that the team is currently embarking on
to understand how to
prevent that from happening.
The thing that I'll say also
is that, as I mentioned,
this is the first time ever
that we're putting these
thread in a human brain,
and human brain, just for size reference,
is 10 times out of the monkey
brain or the sheep brain.
And it's just a very, very
different environment.
It moves a lot more.
It like actually moved a
lot more than we expected
when we did Noland's surgery.
And it's just a very,
very different environment
than what we're used to.
And this is why we do
clinical trial, right?
We wanna uncover some of these issues
and failure modes earlier than later.
So in many ways, it's provided us
with this enormous amount of data
and information to be able to solve this.
And this is something that
Neuralink is extremely good at.
Once we have set of clear objective
and engineering problem,
we have enormous amount
of talents across many, many disciplines
to be able to come together
and fix the problem very, very quickly.
- But it sounds like one of
the fascinating challenges here
is for the system and the decoding side
to be adaptable across
different timescales.
So whether it's movement of threads
or different aspects of signal drift
sort of on the software
of the human brain,
something changing,
like Noland talks about
cursor drift that could be corrected,
and there's a whole UX
challenge to how to do that.
So it sounds like adaptability
is like a fundamental property
that has to be engineered in.
- It is, and I mean I think,
I mean, as a company, we're
extremely vertically integrated.
We make these thin film
arrays in our own microfab.
- Yeah, there's, like
you said, built in-house.
This whole paragraph
here from this blog post
is pretty gangster.
"Building the technology described above
has been no small feat."
And there's a bunch of links here
that I recommend people click on.
"We constructed in-house
micro fabrication capabilities
to rapidly produce various
iterations of thin film arrays
that constitute our electrode threads.
We created a custom femtosecond laser mill
to manufacture components
with micro level precision."
I think there's a tweet
associated with this.
- That's a whole thing
that we can get into.
- Yeah, okay, well, what
are we looking at here?
This thing?
- Yeah.
"So in less than one minute,
our custom-made femtosecond
laser mill cuts this geometry
in the tips of our needles."
So we're looking at this
weirdly-shaped needle.
"The tip is only 10 to
12 microns in width,
only slightly larger than the
diameter of a red blood cell.
The small size allows
threats to be inserted
with minimal damage to the cortex."
Okay, so what's interesting
about this geometry?
So we're looking at this
just geometry of a needle.
- This is the needle that's engaging
with the loops in the thread.
So they're the ones that thread the loop
and then peel it from the silicon backing.
And then this is the
thing that gets inserted
into the tissue, and then this pulls out,
leaving the thread.
And this kind of a
notch or the shark tooth
that we used to call is the thing
that actually is grasping the loop.
And then it's designed in such way,
such that when you pull
out, leaps the loop.
- And the robot is
controlling this needle?
- Correct, so this is
actually housed in a cannula.
And basically, the robot
has a lot of the optics
that look for where the loop is.
There's actually a 405 nanometer light
that actually causes the
polyamide to fluoresce
so that you can locate
the location of the loop.
- So the loop lights up?
- Yeah, yeah, they do.
It's a micron precision process.
- What's interesting about the robot
that it takes to do that?
That's pretty crazy.
That's pretty crazy that robot
is able to get this kind of precision.
- Yeah, our robot is quite heavy.
Our current version of it.
There's, I mean, it's
like a giant granite slab
that weighs about a ton,
'cause it needs to be
sensitive to vibration,
environmental vibration.
And then as the head is moving
at the speed that is moving,
there's a lot of kind of motion control
to make sure that you can
achieve that level of precision.
A lot of optics that
kind of zoom in on that.
We're working on next
generation of the robot
that is lighter, easier to transport.
I mean, it is a feat to move the robot.
- And it's far superior to a human surgeon
at this time for this particular task.
- Absolutely, I mean, let alone
you try to actually thread
a loop in a sewing kit,
I mean this is like,
we're talking like
fractions of human hair.
These things, it's not visible.
- So continuing the paragraph,
"We developed novel hardware
and software testing systems
such as our accelerated
lifetime testing racks
and simulated surgery
environment," which is pretty cool,
"to stress test and validate
the robustness of our technologies.
We performed many
rehearsals of our surgeries
to refine our procedures and
make them second nature."
This is pretty cool.
"We practice surgeries on proxies
with all the hardware and
instruments needed in our mock
or in the engineering space.
This helps us rapidly test and measure."
So there's like proxies.
- Yeah, this proxy's super cool actually.
So there's a 3D printed
skull from the images
that is taken at Barrow,
as well as this hydrogel mix,
sort of synthetic polymer
thing that actually mimics
the mechanical properties of the brain.
It also has vasculature of the person.
So basically, what we're
talking about here,
and there's a lot of work that has gone
into making this set proxy that it's about
like finding the right concentration
of these different synthetic polymers
to get the right set of consistency
for the needle dynamics,
as they're being inserted.
But we practice this
surgery with the person,
Noland's basically physiology
and brain many, many times
prior to actually doing the surgery.
- So every step, every step?
- Every step, yeah.
Like where does someone stand?
I mean, what you're
looking at is the picture.
This is in our office
of this kind of corner
of the robot engineering space
that we have created this like mock
or space that looks exactly like
what they would experience,
all the staff would experience
during their actual surgery.
So I mean, it's just kind
of like any dance rehearsal
where you know exactly
where you're gonna stand
at what point and you just
practice that over and over
and over again with an exact anatomy
of someone that you're going to surgerize.
And it got to a point where
a lot of our engineers,
when we created a
craniectomy, they're like,
"Oh, that looks very familiar.
We've seen that before."
- Yeah.
Man, there's wisdom you can gain
through doing the same thing
over and over and over.
It's like a Jira dreams
of sushi kind of thing,
because then it's like
Olympic athletes visualize
the Olympics, and then
once you actually show up,
it feels easy.
It feels like any other day.
It feels almost boring
winning the gold medal,
'cause you visualized this so many times,
you've practiced this so many times,
and nothing bothers you.
It's boring.
You win the gold medal, it's boring.
And the experience they talk
about is mostly just relief,
probably that they don't
have to visualize it anymore.
- Yeah, the power of
the mind to visualize,
I mean, there's a whole field that studies
where muscle memory lies in cerebellum.
Yeah, it's incredible.
- I think it is a good
place to actually ask
sort of the big question
that people might have is,
how do we know every aspect of this
that you describe is safe?
- At the end of the day, the gold standard
is to look at the tissue.
What sort of trauma did
you cause the tissue?
And does that correlate
to whatever behavioral
anomalies that you may have seen?
And that's the language to
which we can communicate
about the safety of inserting
something into the brain
and what type of trauma
that you can cause.
So we actually have an entire department,
department of pathology that
looks at these tissue slices.
There are many steps that
are involved in doing this.
Once you have studies that are launched
with particular endpoints in mind,
at some point, you have
to euthanize the animal
and then you go through necropsy
to kind of collect the
brain tissue samples.
You fix them in formalin,
and you like gross them, you section them,
and you look at individual slices
just to see what kind of
reaction or lack thereof exists.
So that's the kind of the
language to which FDA speaks
and as well for us to kind
of evaluate the safety
of the insertion mechanism
as well as the threads
at various different time points.
Both acute, so anywhere
between zero to three months
to beyond three months.
- So those are kind of the details
of an extremely high standard of safety
that has to be reached.
- Correct.
- FDA supervises this,
but this, in general,
just a very high standard.
And every aspect of this,
including the surgery,
I think Matthew MacDougall has mentioned
that like the standard is,
let's say, how to put it politely?
Higher than maybe some other operations
that we take for granted.
So the standard for all
the surgical stuff here
is extremely high.
- Very high.
I mean, it's a highly,
highly regulated environment
with the governing
agencies that scrutinize
every medical device that gets marketed.
And I think it's a good thing.
It's good to have those high standards,
and we try to hold
extremely high standards
to kind of understand what
sort of damage, if any,
these innovative emerging technologies
and new technologies
that we're building are.
And so far, we have
been extremely impressed
by lack of immune response
from these threads.
- Speaking of which,
you talk to me with
excitement about the histology
and some of the images
that you're able to share.
Can you explain to me
what we're looking at?
- Yeah, so what you're looking
at is a stained tissue image.
So this is a sectioned tissue slice
from an animal that was
implanted for seven months.
So kind of a chronic time point.
And you're seeing all
these different colors,
and each color indicates
specific types of cell types.
So purple and pink are astrocytes
and microglia respectably.
They're types of glial cells.
And yet the other thing that
people may not be aware of
is your brain is not just made up
of soup of neurons and axons.
There are other cells, like glial cells,
that actually kind of is
the glue and also react
if there are any trauma
or damage to the tissue.
- The brown are the neurons here?
- The brown are the neurons.
- The modern neurons.
- So what you're seeing is,
in this kind of macro image,
you're seeing these like
circle highlighted in white,
the insertion sites.
And when you zoom into one of
those, you see the threads.
And then in this particular case,
I think we're seeing about the 16 wires
that are going into the page.
And the incredible thing here is the fact
that you have the neurons that
are these brown structures
or brown circular or elliptical thing
that are actually touching
and abutting the thread.
So what this is saying is that
there's basically zero trauma
that's caused during this insertion.
And with these neural interfaces,
these micro electrodes that you insert,
that is one of the most
common mode of failure.
So when you insert these
threads, like the Utah array,
it causes neuronal death around the site,
because you're inserting
a foreign object, right?
And that kind of elicit
these like immune response
through microglia and astrocytes.
They form this like
protective layer around it.
Oh, not only are you
killing the neuron cells,
but you're also creating
this protective layer
that then basically prevents you
from recording neural signals,
'cause you're getting
further and further away
from the neurons that
you're trying to record.
And that is the biggest mode of failure.
And in this particular
example, in that inside,
it's about 50 micron with that scale bar.
The neurons just seem
to be attracted to it.
(Lex laughing)
- And so there's certainly no trauma.
That's such a beautiful image, by the way.
So the brown are the neurons.
And for some reason, I can't look away.
It's really cool.
- Yeah, and the way
that these things like, I mean,
your tissues generally don't
have these beautiful colors.
This is multiplex stain that
uses these different proteins
that are staining these
at different colors.
We use very standard set
of staining techniques,
with HG, EB1 and new N and GFAP.
So if you go to the next image,
this is also kind of
illustrates the second point,
'cause you can make an
argument, and initially,
when we saw the previous image, we said,
"Oh, like are the threads just floating?
Like what is happening here?
Like are we actually
looking at the right thing?"
So what we did is we did another stain,
and this is all done in-house,
of this batons, trichrome stain,
which is in blue that shows
these collagen layers.
So the blue basically,
like you don't want the blue
around the implant threads,
'cause that means that there's some sort
of scarring that's happen.
And what you're seeing, if you
look at individual threads,
is that you don't see any of the blue,
which means that there
has been absolutely,
or very, very minimal to a
point where it's not detectable
amount of trauma in
these inserted threads.
- So that presumably is
one of the big benefits
of having this kind of flexible thread.
- Yeah, so we think this is
primarily due to the size,
as well as the flexibility of the threads.
Also the fact that R1
is avoiding vasculature,
so we're not disrupting
or we're not causing damage to the vessels
and not breaking any of
the blood brain barrier
has basically caused the
immune response to be muted.
- But this is also a nice illustration
of the size of things.
So this is the tip of the thread.
- Yeah, those are neurons.
- And they're neurons.
And this is the thread listening.
And the electrodes are positioned how?
- Yeah, so this is,
what you're looking at is
not electrode themselves.
Those are the conductive wires.
So each of those should
probably be two micron in width.
So what we're looking at
is we're looking at the coronal slice.
So we're looking at some
slice of the tissue.
So as you go deeper, you'll obviously have
less and less of the
tapering of the thread.
But yeah, the point basically being
that there's just kind of
cells around the inserter site,
which is just an incredible thing to see.
I've just never seen anything like this.
- How easy and safe is
it to remove the implant?
- Yeah, so it depends on when.
In the first three months
or so after the surgery,
there's a lot of kind of tissue
modeling that's happening.
Similar to when you got a cut,
you obviously start
over first couple weeks,
or depending on the size of the wound,
scar tissue forming, right?
There are these like
contractive, and then in the end,
they turn into scab and
you can scab it off.
The same thing happens in the brain,
and it's a very dynamic environment.
And before the scar
tissue or the neomembrane
or the neomembrane that forms,
it's quite easy to just pull 'em out.
And there's minimal trauma
that's caused during that.
Once the scar tissue forms,
and with Noland as well,
we believe that that's the thing
that's currently anchoring the thread.
So we haven't seen any
more movements since then.
So they're quite stable.
It gets harder to actually
completely extract the threads.
So our current method
for removing the device
is cutting the thread,
leaving the tissue intact,
and then unscrewing and
taking the implant out.
And that hole is now gonna be plugged
with either another Neuralink
or just with kind of a
peak-based, plastic-based cap.
- Is it okay to leave the
threads in there forever?
- Yeah, we think so.
We've done studies where
we left them there,
and one of the biggest
concerns that we had is like,
do they migrate and do they get to a point
where they should not be?
We haven't seen that.
Again, once the scar tissue forms,
they get anchored in place.
And I should also say
that when we say upgrades,
like we're not just
talking in theory here.
Like we've actually
upgraded many, many times.
Most of our monkeys or non-human primates,
NHP have been upgraded.
Pager, who you saw playing mind pong,
has the latest version of
device since two years ago
and is seemingly very
happy and healthy and fat.
- So what's designed for the
future, the upgrade procedure?
So maybe for Noland.
What would the upgrade look like?
It was essentially what you're mentioning.
Is there a way to upgrade
sort of the device internally,
where you take it apart and
sort of keep the capsule
and upgrade the internals?
- Yeah, so there are a
couple different things here.
So for Noland, if we were to upgrade,
what we would have to do
is either cut the threads
or extract the threads depending on
kind of the situation there
in terms of how they're
anchored or scarred in.
If you were to remove them
with the dural substitute,
you have an intact brain
so you can reinsert
different threads with the
updated implant package.
There are a couple different other ways
that we're thinking about,
the future of what the
upgradable system looks like.
One is, at the moment, we
currently remove the dura,
this kind of thick layer
that protects the brain,
but that actually is the thing
that actually proliferates
the scar tissue formation.
So typically, general good rule of thumb
is you wanna leave the nature as is
and not disrupt it as much.
So looking at ways to insert
the threads through the dura,
which comes with different
set of challenges,
such as it's a pretty thick layer,
so how do you actually penetrate that
without breaking the needle?
So we're looking at different
needle design for that,
as well as the kind of
the loop engagement.
The other biggest challenges
are it's quite opaque,
optically, and with
white light illumination.
So how do you avoid still
this biggest advantage
that we have of avoiding vasculature?
How do you image through that?
How do you actually still mediate that?
So there are other imaging techniques
that we're looking at to enable that.
But our hypothesis is that,
and based on some of the
early evidence that we have,
doing through the dura insertion
will cause minimal scarring
that causes them to be much
easier to extract over time.
And the other thing that
we're also looking at,
this is gonna be a fundamental change
in the implant architecture,
is at the moment, it's a
monolithic single implant
that comes with a thread
that's bonded together.
So you can't actually
separate the thing out,
but you can imagine
having two part implant.
Bottom part, that is the
thread that are inserted
that has the chips and maybe
a radio and some power source.
And then you have another implant
that has more of the
computational heavy load
and the bigger battery.
And then one can be under the dura,
one can be above the dura,
like being the plug for the skull.
They can talk to each other,
but the thing that you wanna upgrade,
the computer and not the thread.
If you wanna upgrade that,
you just go in there,
remove the screws and then
put in the next version.
It's a very, very easy surgery too.
Like you do a skin incision,
slip this in, screw.
Probably be able to do this in 10 minutes.
- So that would allow you to
reuse the thread, sort of.
- [DJ] Correct.
- So I mean, this leads to
the natural question of,
what is the pathway to scaling
that increase in the number of threads?
Is that a priority?
What's the technical challenge there?
- Yeah, that is a priority.
So for next versions of the implant,
the key metrics that
we're looking to improve
are number of channels,
just recording from more and more neurons.
We have a pathway to actually
go from currently 1,000
to hopefully 3,000 if not
6,000 by end of this year.
And then end of next year,
we wanna get to even more, 16,000.
- Wow.
- There's a couple limitations to that.
One is obviously being able
to photo lithographically
print those wires.
As I mentioned, it's two
micron in width and spacing.
Obviously, there are chips
that are much more advanced
than those types of resolution,
and we have some of the tools
that we have brought in
house to be able to do that.
So traces will be narrower
just so that you have to have
more of the wires coming up into the chip.
Chips also cannot linearly
consume more energy,
as you have more and more channels.
So there's a lot of
innovations in the circuit
and architecture as well as
the circuit design topology
to make them lower power.
You need to also think about,
if you have all of these spikes,
how do you send that off
to the end application?
So you need to think about
bandwidth limitation there
and potentially innovations
and signal processing.
Physically, one of the biggest challenge
is gonna be the interface.
It's always the interface that breaks.
Bonding this thin film
array to the electronics.
It starts to become very, very
highly dense interconnects.
So how do you characterize that?
There's a lot of innovations
in kind of the 3D integrations
in the recent years
that we can take advantage of.
One of the biggest
challenges that we do have
is forming this hermetic barrier, right?
That this is an extremely
harsh environment
that we're in - the brain.
So how do you protect it from,
yeah, like the brain trying
to kill your electronics
to also your electronics leaking
things that you don't want into the brain.
And that forming that hermetic barrier
is gonna be a very, very big challenge
that we I think are actually
well-suited to tackle.
- How do you test that?
Like what's the development environment
to simulate that kind of harshness?
- Yeah, so this is where
the accelerated life tester
essentially is a brain in a vat.
It literally is a vessel
that is made up of,
and again, for all intents and purpose
for this particular type of test,
your brain is a salt water.
And you can also put some
other set of chemicals
like reactive oxygen species
that get at kind of these interfaces
and trying to cause a
reaction to pull it apart.
But you could also increase the rate
at which these interfaces are aging
by just increasing temperature.
So every 10 degrees
Celsius that you increase,
you're basically accelerating time by 2x.
And there's limit as to how much
temperature you wanna
increase, 'cause at some point,
there's some other non-linear dynamics
that causes you to have
other nasty gases to form
that just is not realistic
in an environment.
So what we do is we
increase in our ALT chamber
by 20 degrees Celsius
that increases the aging by four times.
So essentially one day in ALT chamber,
it's four day in calendar year.
And we look at whether the
implants still are intact,
including the threads and-
- And operation and all of that?
- And operation and all of that.
It obviously is not an exact
same environment as a brain,
'cause brain has mechanical,
other more biological
groups that attack at it.
But it is a good test environment,
testing environment for
at least the enclosure
and the strength of the enclosure.
And I mean, we've had implants,
the current version of the implant
that has been in there for, I mean,
close to two and a half years,
which is equivalent to a decade.
And they seem to be fine.
- So it's interesting that the burn,
so basically, close
approximation is warm salt water,
hot salt water is a good
testing environment.
Yeah, by the way, I'm drinking LMNT,
which is basically salt water,
which is making me kinda,
it doesn't have computational
power the way the brain does,
but maybe in terms of
other characteristics,
it's quite similar and I'm consuming it.
- Yeah, you have to get it
in the right pH too. (laughs)
- And then consciousness will emerge.
Yeah, no.
- By the way, the other thing
that also is interesting
about our enclosure is, if
you look at our implant,
it's not your common-looking
medical implant
that usually is encased in a titanium can
that's laser welded.
We use this polymer called PCTFE,
polychlorotrifluoroethylene,
which is actually commonly
used in blister packs.
So when you have a pill
and you try to pop a pill,
there's like kind of
that plastic membrane.
That's what this is.
No one's actually ever
used this except us.
And the reason we wanted to do this
is 'cause it's
electromagnetically transparent.
So when we talked about
the electromagnetic
inductive charging, with titanium can,
usually, if you wanna
do something like that,
you have to have a sapphire window,
and it's a very, very
tough process to scale.
- So you're doing a lot of iteration here
in every aspect of this.
The materials, the software-
- The whole, whole shebang.
- So, okay.
So you mentioned scaling.
Is it possible to have
multiple Neuralink devices
as one of the ways of scaling?
To have multiple Neuralink
devices implanted?
- That's the goal, that's the goal.
Yeah, we've had, I mean,
our monkeys have had two Neuralinks,
one in each hemisphere.
And then we're also looking
at potential of having
one in motor cortex, one in visual cortex,
and one in wherever other cortex.
- So focusing on a particular function,
one Neuralink device.
- Correct.
- I mean, I wonder if there's
some level of customization
that can be done on the compute side.
So for the motor cortex-
- Absolutely.
That's the goal.
And we talk about at Neuralink
building a generalized
neural interface to the brain.
And that also is strategically
how we're approaching this with marketing.
And also, with regulatory, which is,
hey look, we have the robot,
and the robot can access
any part of the cortex.
Right now, we're focused on motor cortex
with current version of the N1
that's specialized for
motor decoding tasks.
But also, at the end of the day,
there's kind of a general
compute available there.
But typically, if you
wanna really get down
to kind of hyperoptimizing
for power and efficiency,
you do need to get to some
specialized function, right?
But what we're saying is that,
hey, you are now used to this
robotic insertion techniques,
which took many, many
years of showing data
and conversation with the FDA.
And also, internally convincing
ourselves that this is safe.
And now the difference is that
if we go to other parts of
the brain, like visual cortex,
which we're interested
in as our second product,
obviously, it's a completely
different environment.
The cortex is laid out
very, very differently.
It's gonna be more stimulation focus
rather than recording,
just kind of creating visual percepts.
But in the end, we're using the same
thin film array technology.
We're using the same robot
insertion technology.
We're using the same packaging technology.
Now, more the conversation
is focused around
what are the differences
and what are the implication
of those differences
in safety and efficacy?
- The way you said second product
is both hilarious and awesome to me.
That product being restoring
sight for blind people.
So can you speak to
stimulating the visual cortex?
I mean, the possibilities
there are just incredible
to be able to give that
gift back to people
who don't have sight or
even any aspect of that.
Can you just speak to the challenges of,
there's several challenges here.
- Oh, many.
- One of which is,
like you said, from
recording to stimulation.
Just any aspect of that
that you're both excited
and see the challenges of.
- Yeah, I guess I'll start by saying
that we actually have been capable
of stimulating through our thin film array
as well as other electronics for years.
We have actually demonstrated
some of that capabilities
for reanimating the
limb in the spinal cord.
Obviously, for the current EFS study,
we've hardware disabled that,
so that's something
that we wanted to embark
as a separate, separate journey.
And obviously, there are
many, many different ways
to write information into the brain.
The way in which we're doing
that is through electrical,
passing electrical current,
and kind of causing that
to really change the local environment
so that you can sort of artificially cause
kind of the neurons to
depolarize in nearby areas.
For vision specifically, the
way our visual system works,
it's both well-understood.
I mean, anything with kind of brain,
there are aspects of it
that's well-understood.
But in the end, like we
don't really know anything.
But the way visual system works
is that you have photon hitting your eye,
and in your eyes, there
are these specialized cells
called photoreceptor cells
that convert the photon energy
into electrical signals.
That then gets projected
to your back of your head,
your visual cortex.
It goes through actually thalamic system
called LGN that then projects it out.
And then in the visual cortex,
there's visual area one or V1,
and then there's bunch
of other higher level
processing layers like V2, V3.
And there there are actually
kind of interesting parallels.
And when you study the behaviors
of these convolutional neural networks,
like what the different layers
of the network is detecting,
first, they're detecting like these edges,
and they're then detecting
some more natural curves,
and then they start to
detect like objects, right?
Kind of similar thing
happens in the brain.
And a lot of that has been inspired,
and also, it's been kinda exciting to see
some of the correlations there.
But things like from there,
where those cognition arise
and where's color encoded,
there's just not a lot of understanding,
fundamental understanding there.
So in terms of kind of bringing sight back
to those that are blind,
there are many different
forms of blindness.
There's actually million people,
one million people in the
U.S. that are legally blind.
That means like certain, like score below
in kind of the visual tests.
I think it's something like,
if you can see something
at 20 feet distance,
that normal people can
see at 200 feet distance,
like if you're worse than
that, you're legally blind.
- So that means you can't
function effectively.
- Correct.
- Using sight in the world.
- Yeah, like to navigate your environment.
And yeah, there are
different forms of blindness.
There are forms of blindness
where there's some degeneration
of your retina, these photoreceptor cells,
and rest of your visual processing
that I described is intact.
And for those types of individuals,
you may not need to maybe stick electrodes
into the visual cortex.
You can actually build
retinal prosthetic devices
that actually just replaces the function
of that retinal cells
that are degenerated.
And there are many companies
that are working on that.
But that's a very small slice.
Albeit significance, those smaller slice
of folks that are legally blind.
If there's any damage
along that circuitry,
whether it's in the optic nerve
or just the LGN circuitry
or any break in that circuit,
that's not gonna work for you.
And the source of where
you need to actually
cause that visual percept to happen,
because your biological
mechanism not doing that
is by placing electrodes
in the visual cortex
in the back of your head.
And the way in which this would work
is that you would have an external camera,
whether it's something as
unsophisticated as a GoPro
or some sort of wearable
RayBan type glasses
that Meta's working on that
captures a scene, right?
And that scene is then converted
to set of electrical impulses
or stimulation pulses
that you would activate
in your visual cortex
through these thin film arrays.
And by playing in a
concerted kind of orchestra
of these stimulation patterns,
you can create what's called phosphenes,
which are these kind
of white yellowish dots
that you can also create
by just pressing your eyes.
You can actually create those percepts
by stimulating in the visual cortex.
And the name of the game is
really have many of those
and have those percepts be,
the phosphenes be as small as possible
so that you can start to tell apart,
like they're the individual
pixels of the screen, right?
So if you have many, many of those,
potentially, you'll be able to,
in the long term, be able to actually get
naturalistic vision.
But in the like short
term to maybe midterm,
being able to at least be able to have
object detection algorithms
run on your glasses,
the pre-op processing units,
and then being able to at
least see the edges of things
so you don't bump into stuff.
- It's incredible.
This is really incredible.
So you basically would be adding pixels,
and your brain would start to figure out
what those pixels mean.
Yeah, and like with
different kinds of assistant
on the signal processing on all fronts.
- Yeah.
The thing that actually,
so a couple things.
One is, obviously, if
you're blind from birth,
the way brain works,
especially in the early age,
neuroplasticity is really nothing
other than kind of your brain
and different parts of your brain
fighting for the limited territory.
- [Lex] (laughs) Yeah.
- And I mean, very, very quickly,
you see cases where you
know people that are,
I mean, you also hear
about people who are blind
that have heightened sense of
hearing or some other senses.
And the reason for that is that cortex
that's not used just gets taken over
by these different parts of the cortex.
So for those types of individuals,
I mean, I guess they're
going to have to now map
some other parts of their senses
into what they call vision.
But it's gonna be obviously
a very, very different
conscious experience before.
So I think that's a interesting caveat.
The other thing that also
is important to highlight
is that we're currently
limited by our biology
in terms of the wavelength
that we can see.
There's a very, very small wavelength
that is a visible light wavelength
that we can see with our eyes.
But when you have an external
camera with this BCI system,
you're not limited to that.
You can have infrared, you can have UV,
you can have whatever other
spectrum that you want to see.
And whether that gets matched
to some sort of weird conscious
experience, I've no idea.
But oftentimes, I talk to people
about the goal of Neuralink
being going beyond the
limits of our biology.
That's sort of what I mean.
- And if you're able to
control the kind of raw signal,
when we use our sight,
we're getting the photons
and there's not much processing on it.
If you're being able
to control that signal,
maybe you can do some kind of processing.
Maybe you do object
detection ahead of time.
- [DJ] Yeah.
- You're doing some
kind of pre-processing,
and there's a lot of
possibilities to explore that.
So it's not just increasing
sort of thermal imaging,
that kind of stuff, but it's
also just doing some kind
of interesting processing.
- Correct, yeah.
I mean, my theory of how
like visual system works also
is that, I mean, there's
just so many things
happening in the world, and
there's a lot of photons
that are going into your
eye, and it's unclear exactly
where some of the pre-processing
steps are happening.
But I mean, I actually think that just
from a fundamental perspective,
there's just so much,
the reality that we're
in, if it's a reality,
is so there's so much data.
And I think humans are
just unable to actually
like eat enough actually to
process all that information.
So there's some sort of
filtering that does happen,
whether that happens in the retina,
whether that happens in different layers
of the visual cortex.
Unclear.
But like the analogy that
I sometimes think about is,
if your brain is a CCD camera,
and all of the information
in the world is a sun,
and when you try to
actually look at the sun
with the CCD camera,
it's just gonna saturate
the sensors, right?
'Cause it's enormous amount of energy.
So what you do is you end up
adding these filters, right?
To just kind of narrow the information
that's coming to you and being captured.
And I think things like our experiences
or our like drugs like propofol,
that like anesthetic drug or psychedelics,
what they're doing is
they're kind of swapping out
these filters and putting in
new ones or removing older ones
and kind of controlling
our conscious experience.
- Yeah, man, not to
distract from the topic,
but I just took a very
high dose of ayahuasca
in the Amazon jungle.
So yes, it's a nice way to think about it.
You're swapping out different experiences,
and with Neuralink being
able to control that,
primarily at first, to improve function,
not for entertainment purposes
or enjoyment purposes, but-
- Yeah, giving back lost functions.
- Well, giving back lost functions.
And there, especially when the
function is completely lost,
anything is a huge help.
Would you implant a Neuralink
device in your own brain?
- Absolutely.
I mean, maybe not right
now, but absolutely.
- What kind of capability, once reached,
you would start getting real curious
and almost get a little antsy,
like jealous of people that get it
as you watch them get implanted?
- Yeah, I mean I think,
I mean, even with our early participants,
if they start to do
things that I can't do,
which I think is in the
realm of possibility
for them to be able to get, 15, 20,
if not like 100 BPS right?
There's nothing that
fundamentally stops us
from being able to achieve
that type of performance.
I mean, I would certainly get
jealous that they can do that.
- I should say that watching Noland,
I get a little jealous 'cause
he's having so much fun,
and it seems like such a
chill way to play video games.
- Yeah.
So I mean, the thing that also is hard
to appreciate sometimes is that,
he's doing these things while talking.
I mean, it's multitasking, right?
So it's clearly,
it's obviously cognitively intensive,
but similar to how, when we talk,
we move our hands, like these
things like are multitasking.
I mean, he's able to do that.
And you won't be able to do that
with other assistive
technology as far as I'm aware.
If you're obviously using
like an eye tracking device,
you're very much fixated
on that thing that you're trying to do.
And if you're using voice control,
I mean, like if you say some other stuff,
yeah, you don't get to use that.
- Yeah, the multitasking aspect of that
is really interesting.
So it's not just the BPS
for the primary task.
It's the parallelization
of multiple tasks.
If you measure the BPS
for the entirety of the human organism,
so if you're talking and
doing a thing with your mind
and looking around also, I mean,
there's just a lot of paralyzation
that can be happening.
- Yeah.
But I mean, I think at some point for him,
like if he wants to really
achieve those high level BPS,
it does require like
full attention, right?
And that's a separate circuitry
that is a big mystery.
Like how attention works and, you know?
- Yeah, attention, like cognitive load,
I've read a lot of literature
on people doing two tasks.
Like you have your primary
task and a secondary task.
And the secondary task is
a source of distraction.
And how does that affect
the performance of the primary task?
And depending on the tasks,
there's a lot of interesting,
I mean, this is an interesting
computational device, right?
And I think-
- To say the least.
- A lot of novel insights
that can be gained from everything.
I mean, I personally am surprised
that Noland's able to do
such incredible control
of the cursor while talking
and also being nervous at the same time,
'cause he's talking like all of us are,
if you're talking in front of the camera,
you get nervous.
So all of those are coming into play,
and he is able to still
achieve high performance.
Surprising.
I mean, all of this is really amazing.
And I think just after
researching this really in depth,
I kind of want Neuralink.
- (laughs) Get in line.
- And also, the safety get in line.
Well, we should say the registry
is for people who have quadriplegia
and all that kind of stuff so-
- Correct.
- There'll be a separate line for people.
They're just curious, like myself.
So now that Noland, patient P1,
is part of the ongoing prime study,
what's the high level
vision for P2, P3, P4, P5?
And just the expansion
into other human beings
that are getting to
experience this implant?
- Yeah, I mean, the primary goal is,
for our study in the first place
is to achieve safety endpoints.
Just understand safety of this device,
as well as the implantation process.
And also, at the same time,
understand the efficacy
and the impact that it could have
on the potential users' lives.
And just because you have,
you're living with tetraplegia,
it doesn't mean your situation
is same as another person
living with tetraplegia.
It's wildly, wildly varying.
It's something that we're
hoping to also understand
how our technology can serve
not just a very small
slice of those individuals,
but broader group of individuals
and being able to get the
feedback to just really build
just the best product for them.
There's obviously also goals that we have,
and the primary purpose of
the early feasibility study
is to learn from each
and every participant
to improve the device, improve the surgery
before we embark on what's
called a pivotal study
that then is much larger trial
that starts to look at
statistical significance
of your endpoints, and that's required
before you can then market the device.
And that's how it works in the U.S.
and just generally around the world.
That's the process you follow.
So our goal is to really just understand
from people like Noland,
P2, P3, future participants,
what aspects of our
device needs to improve.
If it turns out that people are like,
"I really don't like the fact
that it lasts only six hours.
I wanna be able to use this
computer for like 24 hours."
I mean, that is a user
needs and user requirements,
which we can only find out
from just being able to engage with them.
- So before the pivotal study,
there's kind of like a rapid innovation
based on individual experiences.
You're learning from individual
people how they use it,
like the high resolution details
in terms of like cursor control and signal
and all that kind of stuff
to like life experience.
- Yeah, yeah, so there's hardware changes
but also just firmware updates.
So even when we had that sort
of recovery event for Noland,
he now has the new firmware
that he has been updated with.
And it's similar to how like your phones
get updated all the time
with new firmware for security patches,
whatever new functionality UI, right?
And that's something that is
possible with our implant.
It's not a static one-time device
that can only do the thing
that it said it can do.
I mean, it's similar to Tesla.
You can do over the air firmware updates,
and now you have completely
new user interface.
And all this bells and
whistles and improvements
on everything like the latest, right?
When we say generalized platform,
that's what we're talking about.
- Yeah, it's really cool how
the app that Noland is using,
there's like calibration,
all that kind of stuff.
And then there's update.
You just click and get an update.
What other future capabilities
are you kinda looking to?
You said vision.
That's a fascinating one.
What about sort of
accelerated typing or speech,
this kind of stuff?
And what else is there?
- Yeah, those are still in
the realm of movement program.
So largely speaking, we have two programs.
We have the movement program
and we have the vision program.
The movement program
currently is focused around
the digital freedom.
As you can easily guess,
if you can control
2D cursor in the digital space,
you could move anything
in the physical space.
So robotic arms, wheelchair,
your environment,
or even really like, whether
it's through the phone
or just like directly to those interfaces,
so like to those machines.
So we're looking at ways to kind of expand
those types of capability,
even for Noland.
That requires conversation with the FDA
and kind of showing safety data for,
if there's a robotic arm or a wheelchair
that we can guarantee that
they're not gonna hurt
themselves accidentally, right?
It's very different if you're moving stuff
in the digital domain versus
like in the physical space,
you can actually potentially
cause harm to the participants.
So we're working through that right now.
Speech does involve
different areas of the brain.
Speech prosthetic is
very, very fascinating,
and there's actually been a
lot of really amazing work
that's been happening in academia.
Sergei Stavisky at UC
Davis, Jaimie Henderson,
and late Krishna Shenoy at Stanford
doing just some incredible amount of work
in improving speech neuroprosthetics.
And those are actually looking more
at parts of the motor cortex
that are controlling
these focal articulators.
And being able to like,
even by mouthing the
word or imagine speech,
you can pick up those signals.
The more sophisticated higher
level processing areas,
like the Broca's area or Wernicke's area,
those are still very, very big mystery
in terms of the underlying mechanism
of how all that stuff works.
But yeah, I mean, I think
Neuralink's event goal
is to kind of understand those things
and be able to provide
a platform and tools
to be able to understand
that and study that.
- This is where I get to
the pothead questions.
Do you think we can start getting insight
into things like thought?
So speech is,
there's a muscular
component, like you said.
There's like the act of producing sounds.
But then what about the
internal things like cognition?
Like low level thoughts
and high level thoughts.
Do you think we'll start noticing
kind of signals that could be picked up?
They could be understood,
they could be maybe used
in order to interact
with the outside world.
- In some ways, like I guess this starts
to kind of get into the heart
problem of consciousness.
And I mean, on one hand,
all of these are, at some point,
set of electrical signals,
that from there, maybe it in itself
is giving you the
cognition or the meaning,
or somehow, human mind
is incredibly amazing
storytelling machine.
So we're telling ourselves
and fooling ourselves
that there's some
interesting meaning here.
But I mean, I certainly think that BCI
and really BCI at the end of the day
is a set of tools that
help you kind of study
the underlying mechanisms
in both like local
but also broader sense.
And whether there's some
interesting patterns
of like electrical signal,
that means like you're
thinking this versus,
and you can either like learn
from like many, many sets of
data to correlate some of that
and be able to do mind reading or not.
I'm not sure.
I certainly would not
kind of rule that out
as a possibility, but I think BCI alone
probably can't do that.
There's probably additional
set of tools and framework.
And also, like just heart
problem of consciousness
at the end of the day is rooted
in this philosophical question of like,
what's the meaning of it all?
What's the nature of our existence?
Where's the mind emerge
from this complex network?
- Yeah, how does the
subjective experience emerge
from just a bunch of
spikes, electrical spikes?
- Yeah, yeah, I mean, we
do really think about BCI
and what we're building as a tool
for understanding the mind, the brain.
The only question that matters.
There's actually,
there actually is some
biological existence proof
of like what it would take
to kind of start to form
some of these experiences
that may be unique.
If you actually look at
every one of our brains,
there are two hemispheres.
There's a left-sided brain,
there's a right-sided brain.
And I mean, unless you
have some other conditions,
you normally don't feel like
left legs or right legs.
Like you just feel like one legs, right?
So what is happening there, right?
If you actually look
at the two hemispheres,
there's a structure that
kind of characterize the two
called the corpus callosum
that is supposed to have
around 200 to 300 million
connections or axons.
So whether that means that's
the number of interface
and electrodes that we need
to create some sort of
mind meld, or from that,
like whatever new conscious experience
that you can experience.
But yeah, I do think that there's like
kind of an interesting existence
proof that we all have.
- And that threshold is
unknown at this time.
- Oh yeah, these things,
everything in this domain
is speculation, right?
- And then there would be,
you'd be continuously
pleasantly surprised.
Do you see a world where
there's millions of people,
like tens of millions,
hundreds of millions of people
walking around with a Neuralink device,
or multiple Neuralink
devices in their brain?
- I do.
First of all, there are,
like if you look at
worldwide, people suffering
from movement disorders
and visual deficits.
I mean, that's in the tens if not hundreds
of millions of people.
So that alone, I think,
there's a lot of benefit
and potential good that we can do
with this type of technology.
And once you start to
get into kind of neuro,
like psychiatric application, depression,
anxiety, hunger, or obesity, right?
Like mood, control of appetite,
I mean, that starts to
become very real to everyone.
- Not to mention that most people on earth
have a smartphone.
And once BCI starts
competing with a smartphone
as a preferred methodology
of interacting with the digital world,
that also becomes an interesting thing.
- Oh yeah, I mean, yeah.
This is even before going to that, right?
I mean, there's like almost,
I mean, the entire world
that could benefit from
these types of thing.
And then, yeah, like
if we're talking about
kind of next generation
of how we interface with
machines or even ourselves,
in many ways, I think BCI
can play a role in that.
And some of the things
that I also talk about
is I do think that there
is a real possibility
that you could see eight billion people
walking around with Neuralink.
- Well, thank you so
much for pushing ahead.
And I look forward to
that exciting feature.
- Thanks for having me.
- Thanks for listening to
this conversation with DJ Seo.
And now, dear friends,
here's Matthew MacDougall,
the head neurosurgeon at Neuralink.
When did you first become
fascinated with the human brain?
- Since forever.
As far back as I can remember,
I've been interested in the human brain.
I mean, I was a thoughtful kid
and a bit of an outsider.
And you sit there thinking about
what the most important
things in the world are
in your little tiny adolescent brain.
And the answer that I came to,
that I converged on was
that all of the things
you can possibly conceive of,
as things that are important
for human beings to care about
are literally contained in the skull.
Both the perception of them
and their relative values.
And the solutions to all our problems
and all of our problems are
all contained in the skull.
And if we knew more about how that worked,
how the brain encodes information
and generates desires and
generates agony and suffering,
we could do more about it.
You think about all the
really great triumphs
in human history.
You think about all the
really horrific tragedies.
You think about the holocaust,
you think about any prison
full of human stories,
and all of those problems
boil down to neurochemistry.
So if you get a little
bit of control over that,
you provide people the
option to do better.
And in the way I read history,
the way people have dealt
with having better tools
is that they most often
in the end do better,
with huge asterisk.
But I think it's an interesting,
a worthy and noble pursuit
to give people more options, more tools.
- Yeah, that's a fascinating
way to look at human history.
You just imagine all these
neurobiological mechanisms,
Stalin, Hitler, all of these, Gengis Khan,
all of them just had like a brain,
just a bunch of neurons,
like a few tons of billions of neurons
gaining a bunch of information
over a period of time.
They have a set of module
that does language and
memory and all that.
And from there, in the
case of those people,
they're able to murder millions of people.
- [Matthew] Yeah.
- All that coming from,
there's not some glorified
notion of a dictator
of this enormous mind
or something like this.
It's just the brain.
- Yeah, yeah.
I mean, a lot of that
has to do with how well
people like that can
organize those around them.
- Other brains.
- Yeah, and so I always
find it interesting
to look to primatology,
look to our closest non-human relatives
for clues as to how
humans are going to behave
and what particular humans
are able to achieve.
And so you look at chimpanzees and bonobos
and they're similar but different
in their social structures particularly.
And I went to Emory in Atlanta
and studied under Frans,
the great Frans de Waal,
who was kind of the leading
primatologist who recently died,
and his work at looking
at chimps through the lens
of how you would watch
an episode of "Friends"
and understand the motivations
of the characters
interacting with each other.
He would look at a chimp colony
and basically apply that lens.
I'm massively oversimplifying it.
If you do that, instead of just saying,
subject 473 through his
feces at subject 471,
you talk about them in terms
of their human struggles,
accord them the dignity
of themselves as actors
with understandable goals and drives,
what they want out of life.
And primarily, it's the
things we want out of life:
food, sex, companionship, power.
You can understand chimp
and bonobo behavior
in the same lights much more easily.
And I think doing so gives
you the tools you need
to reduce human behavior from
the kind of false complexity
that we layer onto it with language
and look at it in terms of,
oh, well, these humans are
looking for companionship,
sex, food, power.
And I think that's a pretty powerful tool
to have in understanding human behavior.
- And I just went to the
Amazon jungle for a few weeks,
and it's a very visceral reminder
that a lot of life on earth
is just trying to get laid.
They're all screaming at each other.
Like I saw a lot of monkeys,
and they're just trying
to impress each other,
or maybe if there's a battle for power,
but a lot of the battle for power
has to do with them getting laid.
- Right.
Breeding rights often
go with alpha status.
And so if you can get a piece of that,
then you're gonna do okay.
- And would like to think
that we're somehow
fundamentally different,
but especially when it comes to primates,
we're really aren't, you know.
We can use fancier poetic language,
but maybe some of the underlying drives
that motivate us are similar.
- Yeah, I think that's true.
- And all of that is coming
from this, the brain.
- Yeah.
- So when did you first
start studying the brain
as I guess as a biological mechanism?
- Basically, the moment I got to college,
I started looking around for labs
that I could do neuroscience work in.
I originally approached
that from the angle
of looking at interactions
between the brain
and the immune system, which
isn't the most obvious place
to start, but I had this idea at the time
that the contents of your
thoughts would have an impact,
a direct impact, maybe a powerful one
on non-conscious systems in your body.
The systems we think of as homeostatic,
automatic mechanisms like
fighting off a virus,
like repairing a wound.
And sure enough, there are big
crossovers between the two.
I mean, it gets to kind of a key point
that I think goes under recognized.
One of the things people don't recognize
or appreciate about
the human brain enough,
and that is that it basically controls
or has a huge role in almost
everything that your body does.
Like you try to name an example
of something in your body
that isn't directly controlled
or massively influenced by the
brain, and it's pretty hard.
I mean, you might say like
bone healing or something,
but even those systems, the
hypothalamus and pituitary
end up playing a role in
coordinating the endocrine system
that does have a direct influence on, say,
the calcium level in your blood
that goes to bone healing.
So non-obvious connections
between those things
implicate the brain as really a potent
prime mover in all of health.
- One of the things I realized
in the other direction too,
how most of the systems in the body
integrated with the human brain,
like they affect the brain
also, like the immune system.
I think there's just people
who study Alzheimer's
and those kinds of things.
It's just surprising how
much you can understand
of that from the immune
system, from the other systems
that don't obviously seem
to have anything to do
with sort of the nervous system.
They all play together.
- Yeah, you could
understand how that would be
driven by evolution too,
just in some simple examples.
If you get sick, if you
get a communicable disease,
you get the flu, it's pretty advantageous
for your immune system to tell your brain,
"Hey, now be antisocial for a few days.
Don't go be the life of the party tonight.
In fact, maybe just
cuddle up somewhere warm
under a blanket and just
stay there for a day or two."
And sure enough, that
tends to be the behavior
that you see both in
animals and in humans.
If you get sick, elevated
levels of interleukins
in your blood and TNF alpha in your blood
ask the brain to cut
back on social activity.
And even moving around,
you have lower locomotor activity
in animals that are infected with viruses.
- So from there, the early days
in neuroscience to surgery,
when did that step happen?
- Yeah.
- This is a leap.
- It was sort of an evolution of thought.
I wanted to study the brain.
I started studying the brain in undergrad
in this neuroimmunology lab.
I, from there, realized at some point
that I didn't wanna
just generate knowledge.
I wanted to effect real
changes in the actual world,
in actual people's lives.
And so after having not
really thought about
going into medical school,
I was on a track to go into a PhD program.
I said, "Well, I'd like that option.
I'd like to actually potentially help
tangible people in front of me."
And doing a little digging
found that there exists
these MD-PhD programs where
you can choose not to choose
between them and do both.
And so I went to USC for medical school
and had a joint PhD program with Caltech,
where I actually chose
that program particularly
because of a researcher at
Caltech named Richard Andersen,
who's one of the godfathers
of primate neuroscience
and has a MACAC lab where Utah arrays
and other electrodes were being inserted
into the brains of monkeys
to try to understand
how intentions were being
encoded in the brain.
So I ended up there with the idea
that maybe I would be a neurologist
and study the brain on the side,
and then discovered that neurology,
again, I'm gonna make
enemies by saying this,
but neurology predominantly
and distressingly to me is the practice
of diagnosing a thing and then saying,
"Good luck with that.
There's not much we can do."
And neurosurgery, very differently,
it's a powerful lever on taking people
that are headed in a bad direction
and changing their course
in the sense of brain tumors
that are potentially treatable
or curable with surgery.
Even aneurysms in the brain,
blood vessels that are gonna rupture,
you can save lives really
is at the end of the
day, what mattered to me.
And so I was at USC, as I mentioned,
that happens to be one of the
great neurosurgery programs.
And so I met these truly
epic neurosurgeons,
Alex Khalessi and Mike
Apuzzo and Steve Giannotta
and Marty Weiss, these sort of epic people
that were just human
beings in front of me.
And so it kind of changed my thinking
from neurosurgeons are distant gods
that live on another planet
and occasionally come and visit us
to these are humans that
have problems and are people.
And there's nothing
fundamentally preventing me
from being one of them.
And so at the last
minute in medical school,
I changed gears from going
into a different specialty
and switched into neurosurgery,
which cost me a year.
I had to do another year of research,
because I was so far along in the process
to switch into neurosurgery.
The deadlines had already passed.
So it was a decision that cost time,
but absolutely worth it.
- What was the hardest
part of the training
on the neurosurgeon track?
- Yeah, two things.
I think that residency in neurosurgery
is sort of a competition of pain,
of like how much pain
can you eat and smile.
- Yeah.
- And so there's
workout restrictions that are not really,
they're viewed at, I think, internally
among the residents as weakness.
And so most neurosurgery residents
try to work as hard as they can.
And that I think necessarily
means working long hours,
and sometimes, over the work hour limits.
And we care about being compliant
with whatever regulations
are in front of us.
But I think more important than that,
people wanna give their all
in becoming a better neurosurgeon,
because the stakes are so high.
And so it's a real fight to get residents
to say go home at the end of their shift
and not stay and do more surgery.
- Are you seriously saying
like one of the hardest things
is literally like
forcing them to get sleep
and rest and all this kind of stuff?
- Historically, that was the case.
I think the next generation,
I think the next generation
is more compliant
and more selfcare-
- Weaker is what you mean.
All right, I'm just
kidding, I'm just kidding.
- I didn't say it.
- Now I'm making enemies.
Okay, I get it.
Wow, that's fascinating.
So what was the second thing?
- The personalities.
And maybe the two are connected, but-
- Was it pretty competitive?
- It's competitive and it's also,
as we touched on earlier,
primates like power,
and I think neurosurgery
has long had this aura
of mystique and excellence
and whatever about it.
And so it's an invitation
I think for people
that are cloaked in that authority.
A board certified
neurosurgeon is basically
a walking fallacious
appeal to authority, right?
You have license to walk into any room
and act like you're an expert on whatever.
And fighting that tendency
is not something that most
neurosurgeons do well.
Humility isn't the forte.
- Yeah, so I have friends who know you,
and whenever they speak about you,
that you have the surprising quality
for a neurosurgeon of humility,
which I think indicates
that it's not as common
as perhaps in other professions,
'cause there is a kind of gigantic
sort of heroic aspect to neurosurgery,
and I think it gets to
people's head a little bit.
- Yeah.
Well, I think that allows me to play well
at an Elon company.
Because Elon, one of his strengths,
I think, is to just instantly see through
fallacy from authority.
So nobody walks into a
room that he's in and says,
"Well, goddamn it, you have to trust me.
I'm the guy that built the
last 10 rockets or something."
And he says, "Well, you did it wrong
and we can do it better."
Or, "I'm the guy that kept Ford
alive for the last 50 years.
You listen to me on how to build cars."
And he says no.
And so you don't walk
into a room that he's in
and say, "Well, I'm a neurosurgeon.
Let me tell you how to do it."
He's gonna say, "Well, I'm a
human being that has a brain.
I can think from first principles myself,
thank you very much.
And here's how I think
it ought to be done.
Let's go try it and see who's right."
And that's proven I think
over and over in his case
to be a very powerful approach.
- If we just take that tangent,
there's a fascinating
interdisciplinary team at Neuralink
that you get to interact
with, including Elon.
What do you think is the
secret to a successful team?
What have you learned
from just getting to observe these folks?
World experts in different
disciplines work together.
- Yeah, there's a sweet
spot where people disagree
and forcefully speak their mind
and passionately defend their position,
and yet are still able to
accept information from others
and change their ideas when they're wrong.
And so I like the analogy
of sort of how you polish rocks.
You put hard things in a
hard container and spin it.
People bash against each other
and outcome's a more refined product.
And so to make a good team at Neuralink,
we've tried to find
people that are not afraid
to defend their ideas passionately.
And occasionally, strongly
disagree with people
that they're working with
and have the best idea come out on top.
It's not an easy balance, again,
to refer back to the primate brain.
It's not something that is inherently
built into the primate brain to say,
"I passionately put all
my chips on this position
and now I'm just gonna walk away from it.
Admit you were right."
Part of our brains tell us
that that is a power loss.
That is a loss of face,
a loss of standing in the community.
And now, you're a zeta chimp,
'cause your idea got trounced.
And you just have to recognize
that that little voice
in the back of your head is maladaptive
and it's not helping the team win.
- Yeah, you have to have the confidence
to be able to walk away from
an idea that you hold onto.
Yeah.
- Yeah.
- And if you do that often enough,
you're actually going to become
the best in the world at your thing.
I mean, that kind of that rapid iteration.
- Yeah, you'll at least be
a member of a winning team.
- Ride the wave.
What did you learn?
You mentioned there's a lot of
amazing neurosurgeons at USC.
What lessons about surgery and life
have you learned from those folks?
- Yeah, I think working
your ass off, working hard
while functioning as a member of a team,
getting a job done that
is incredibly difficult,
working incredibly long
hours, being up all night,
taking care of someone that
you think probably won't
survive no matter what you do.
Working hard to make people
that you passionately dislike
look good the next morning.
These folks were
relentless in their pursuit
of excellent neurosurgical
technique decade over decade.
And I think we're well-recognized
for that excellence.
Especially Marty Weiss,
Steve Giannotta, Mike Apuzzo,
they made huge contributions
not only to surgical technique,
but they built training
programs that trained
dozens or hundreds of
amazing neurosurgeons.
I was just lucky to kind
of be in their wake.
- What's that like, you
mentioned doing a surgery
where the person is likely not to survive.
Does that wear on you?
- Yeah.
It's especially challenging when you,
with all respect to our elders,
it doesn't hit so much
when you're taking care of an 80-year-old
and something was going to
get them pretty soon anyway.
And so you lose a patient like that,
and it was part of the natural course
of what is expected of them in
the coming years, regardless.
Taking care of a father of
two or three, four young kids,
someone in their 30s that
didn't have it coming,
and they show up in your ER
having their first seizure of their life,
and lo and behold, they've
got a huge, malignant,
inoperable or incurable brain tumor.
You can only do that, I
think, a handful of times
before it really starts
eating away at your armor.
Or a young mother that shows up
that has a giant hemorrhage in her brain
that she's not gonna survive from.
And they bring her four-year-old daughter
to say goodbye one last time
before they turn the ventilator off.
The great Henry Marsh is
a English neurosurgeon
who said it best.
I think he says that every neurosurgeon
carries with them a private graveyard,
and I definitely feel that,
especially with young parents.
That kills me.
They had a lot more to give.
The loss of those people specifically
has a knock on effect that's
going to make the world worse
for people for a long time.
And it's just hard to feel
powerless in the face of that.
And that's where I think you
have to be borderline evil
to fight against a company like Neuralink
or to constantly be taking pot shots at us
because what we're doing is
to try to fix that stuff.
We're trying to give people options,
to reduce suffering.
We're trying to take the pain out of life
that broken brains brings in.
And yeah, this is just our little way
that we're fighting back
against entropy, I guess.
- Yeah, the amount of
suffering that's endured
when some of the things
that we take for granted
that our brain is able to
do is taken away is immense.
And to be able to restore
some of that functionality is a real gift.
- Yeah, we're just starting.
We're gonna do so much more.
- Well, can you take me
through the full procedure
of implanting, say, the
N1 chip in Neuralink?
- Yeah, it's a really simple,
really simple, straightforward procedure.
The human part of the surgery
that I do is dead simple.
It's one of the most basic
neurosurgery procedures imaginable.
And I think there's evidence
that some version of it
has been done for thousands of years.
That there are examples I
think from ancient Egypt
of healed or partially healed
trephinations from Peru
or ancient times in South America
where these protosurgeons
would drill holes in people's skulls,
presumably to let out the evil spirits,
but maybe to drain blood clots.
And there's evidence of bone
healing around the edge,
meaning the people at least survive
some months after a procedure.
And so what we're doing is that.
We are making a cut in the
skin on the top of the head
over the area of the brain
that is the most potent
representation of hand intentions.
And so if you are an
expert concert pianist,
this part of your brain is lighting up
the entire time you're playing.
We call it the hand knob.
- The hand knob.
- Yeah.
- So it's all like the finger movement.
All of that is just firing away.
- Yep, there's a little squiggle
in the cortex right there.
One of the folds in the brain
is kind of doubly folded
right on that spot.
So you can look at it on an MRI and say,
"That's the hand knob."
And then you do a functional test
and a special kind of MRI called
an a functional MRI, fMRI.
And this part of the brain
lights up when people,
even quadriplegic people whose brains
aren't connected to their
finger movements anymore.
They imagine finger movements,
and this part of the
brain still lights up.
So we can ID that part of the brain
in anyone who's preparing
to enter our trial and say,
"Okay, that part of the brain, we confirm,
is your hand intention area."
And so I'll make a little cut in the skin,
we'll flap the skin open,
just like kind of opening
the hood of a car,
only a lot smaller.
Make a perfectly round one inch
diameter hole in the skull,
remove that bit of skull,
open the lining of the brain,
the covering of the brain.
It's like a little bag of
water that the brain floats in.
And then show that part
of the brain to our robot.
And then this is where the robot shines.
It can come in and take these tiny,
much smaller than human hair electrodes
and precisely insert them into the cortex,
into the surface of the brain
to a very precise depth,
in a very precise spot that
avoids all the blood vessels
that are coating the surface of the brain.
And after the robot's done with its part,
then the human comes back
in and puts the implant
into that hole in the
skull and covers it up,
screwing it down to the skull
and sewing the skin back together.
So the whole thing is a few hours long.
It's extremely low risk compared
to the average neurosurgery
involving the brain that might say,
open up a deep part of the brain
or manipulate blood vessels in the brain.
This opening on the surface of the brain,
with only cortical micro insertions,
carries significantly less risk
than a lot of the tumor
or aneurysm surgeries
that are routinely done.
- So cortical micro
insertions that are via robot
and computer vision are designed
to avoid the blood vessels.
- Exactly.
- So I know you're a bit biased here,
but let's compare human and machine.
- Sure.
- So what are human
surgeons able to do well,
and what are robot
surgeons able to do well
at this stage of our human
civilization development?
- Yeah, yeah, that's a good question.
Humans are general purpose machines.
We're able to adapt to unusual situations.
We're able to change the plan on the fly.
I remember well a surgery that
I was doing many years ago
down in San Diego, where the
plan was to open a small hole
behind the ear and go
reposition a blood vessel
that had come to lay on the facial nerve,
the trigeminal nerve, the
nerve that goes to the face.
When that blood vessel lays on the nerve,
it can cause just intolerable,
horrific shooting pain
that people describe like being
zapped with a cattle prod.
And so the beautiful, elegant surgery
is to go move this blood
vessel off the nerve.
The surgery team, we went in there
and started moving this blood vessel
and then found that there
was a giant aneurysm
on that blood vessel that
was not easily visible
on the pre-op scans.
And so the plan had to dynamically change,
and the human surgeons
had no problem with that.
We're trained for all those things.
Robots wouldn't do so
well in that situation,
at least in their current incarnation,
fully robotic surgery,
like the electrode insertion portion
of the Neuralink surgery.
It goes according to a set plan.
And so the humans can interrupt the flow
and change the plan, but the robot
can't really change the
plan midway through.
It operates according
to how it was programmed
and how it was asked to run.
It does its job very precisely,
but not with a wide degree of latitude
and how to react to changing conditions.
- So there could be just a
very large number of ways
that you could be surprised as a surgeon
when you enter a situation
that could be subtle things
that you have to dynamically adjust to.
- Correct.
- And robots are not
good at that.
- Currently.
- Currently.
I think we are at the
dawn of a new era with AI
of the parameters for robot responsiveness
to be dramatically broadened, right?
I mean, you can't look
at a self-driving car
and say that it's operating
under very narrow parameters.
If a chicken runs across the road,
it wasn't necessarily
programmed to deal with that,
specifically, but a Waymo
or a self-driving Tesla
would have no problem reacting
to that appropriately.
And so surgical robots aren't
there yet, but give it time.
- And then there could be a lot of,
sort of into like
semi-autonomous possibilities
of maybe a robotic surgeon could say,
this situation is perfectly familiar,
or the situation is not familiar.
And in the not familiar case,
a human could take over.
But basically like be very
conservative in saying,
"Okay, this for sure has
no issues, no surprises,
and let the humans deal
with the surprises,
with the edge cases, all that."
That's one possibility.
So you think eventually,
you'll be out of the job?
Well, you being neurosurgeon,
your job being neurosurgeon.
Humans, there will not
be many neurosurgeons
left on this earth.
- I'm not worried about my job
in the course of my professional life.
I think I would tell my
my kids not necessarily
to go in this line of work
depending on how things look in 20 years.
- It's so fascinating, 'cause I mean,
if I have a line of work, I
would say it's programming.
And if you ask me like for the
last, I don't know, 20 years,
what I would recommend for people,
I would tell 'em, yeah, go.
You will always have a job
if you're a programmer,
'cause there's more and more computers
and all this kind of
stuff and it pays well.
But then you realize these
large language models
come along and they're really
damn good at generating code.
So overnight, you could be surprised like,
"Wow, like what is the
contribution of the human really?"
But then you start to think,
"Okay, it does seem like
humans have ability,
like you said, to deal
with novel situations."
In the case of programming,
it's the ability
to kinda come up with novel
ideas to solve problems.
It seems like machines aren't
quite yet able to do that.
And when the stakes are very high,
when it's life critical,
as it is in surgery,
especially in neurosurgery,
the stakes are very high
for a robot to actually replace a human.
But it's fascinating that
in this case of Neuralink,
there's a human-robot collaboration.
- Yeah, yeah.
I do the parts it can't do,
and it does the parts I can't do.
And we are friends.
(Lex laughing)
- I saw that there's a
lot of practice going on.
So I mean, everything in Neuralink
is tested extremely rigorously.
But one of the things I
saw, that there's a proxy
on which the surgeries are performed.
- Yeah.
- So this is both
for the robot and for the human,
for everybody involved
in the entire pipeline.
What's that like practicing the surgery?
- It's pretty intense.
So there's no analog to
this in human surgery.
Human surgery is sort
of this artisanal craft
that's handed down directly
from master to pupil over the generations.
I mean, literally the way you learn
to be a surgeon on humans is
by doing surgery on humans.
I mean, first, you watch
your professors do a bunch of surgery,
and then finally, they
put the trivial parts
of the surgery into your hands,
and then the more complex parts.
And as your understanding of the point
and the purposes of the surgery increases,
you get more responsibility
in the perfect condition.
Doesn't always go well.
In Neuralink's case, the
approach is a bit different.
We, of course, practiced as
far as we could on animals.
We did hundreds of animal surgeries.
And when it came time
to do the first human,
we had just amazing
team of engineers build
incredibly lifelike models.
One of the engineers, Fran
Romano, in particular built
a pulsating brain in a
custom 3D printed skull
that matches exactly
the patient's anatomy,
including their face and
scalp characteristics.
And so when I was able to practice that,
I mean, it's as close as it
really reasonably should get
to being the real thing
and all the details,
including the having a mannequin body
attached to this custom head.
And so when we were doing
the practice surgeries,
we'd wheel that body into the CT scanner
and take a mock CT scan
and wheel it back in
and conduct all the normal
safety checks verbally.
"Stop, this patient, we're
confirming his identification,
is mannequin number blah, blah, blah."
And then opening the brain
in exactly the right spot
using standard operative
neuronavigation equipment,
standard surgical drills in the same OR
that we do all of our practice
surgeries in at Neuralink.
And having the skull open
and have the brain pulse,
which adds a degree of
difficulty for the robot
to perfectly precisely plan
and insert those electrodes
to the right depth and location.
And so yeah, we kind of broke new ground
on how extensively we
practiced for this surgery.
- So there was a historic moment,
a big milestone for Neuralink
in part for humanity with the first human
getting a Neuralink implant
in January of this year.
Take me through the surgery on Noland.
What did it feel like to be part of this?
- Yeah.
Well, we're lucky to have
just incredible partners
at the Barrow Neurologic Institute.
They are, I think, the premier
neurosurgical hospital in the world.
They made everything as easy as possible
for the trial to get going
and helped us immensely
with their expertise on
how to arrange the details.
It was a much more high
pressure surgery in some ways.
I mean, even though the
outcome wasn't particularly
in question in terms of
our participant safety,
the number of observers,
the number of people,
there's conference rooms full of people
watching live streams in the hospital,
rooting for this to go perfectly,
and that just adds pressure
that is not typical
for even the most intense
production neurosurgery.
Say, removing a tumor or placing
deep brain stimulation electrodes.
And it had never been
done on a human before.
There were unknown unknowns.
And so definitely, a
moderate pucker factor there
for the whole team,
not knowing if we were going to encounter,
say, a degree of brain
movement that was unanticipated
or a degree of brain
sag that took the brain
far away from the skull and
made it difficult to insert
or some other unknown unknown problem.
Fortunately, everything went well
and that surgery is one of the smoothest
outcomes we could have imagined.
- Were you nervous?
I mean, you're a bit quarterback
in the Super Bowl kind of situation.
- Extremely nervous.
Extremely.
I was very pleased when it went well
and when it was over.
Looking forward to number two.
- Yeah.
Even with all that practice, all of that,
you've never been in a situation
that's still high stakes in
terms of people watching.
And we should also probably mention,
given how the media
works, a lot of people,
maybe in a dark kind of way,
hoping it doesn't go well.
- Well, I think wealth is easy to hate
or envy or whatever.
And I think there's a whole
industry around driving clicks,
and bad news is great for clicks.
And so any way to take an
event and turn it into bad news
is gonna be really good for clicks.
- It just sucks because I think
it puts pressure on people.
It discourages people from trying to solve
really hard problems, because
to solve hard problems,
you have to go into the unknown.
You have to do things that
haven't been done before,
and you have to take risks.
- Yeah.
- Calculated risks.
You have to do all kinds
of safety precautions,
but risks nevertheless.
And I just wish there would
be more celebration of that,
of the risk taking versus
like people just waiting
on the sidelines, like
waiting for failure,
and then pointing out the failure.
Yeah, it sucks.
But in this case, it's
really great that everything
went just flawlessly,
but it's unnecessary
pressure, I would say.
- Now that there's a human
with literal skin in the game,
there's a participant whose wellbeing
rides on this doing well,
you have to be a pretty bad person
to be rooting for that to go wrong.
And so hopefully, people
look in the mirror
and realize that at some point.
- So did you get to
actually front row seat
like watch the robot work?
You get to see the whole thing?
- Yeah, I mean, because an
MD needs to be in charge
of all of the medical decision making
throughout the process, I
unscrubbed from the surgery
after exposing the brain and
presenting it to the robot
and placed the targets on the robot
software interface that tells the robot
where it's going to insert
each thread that was done
with my hand on the mouse,
for whatever that's worth.
- So you were the one placing the targets?
- Yeah.
- Oh, cool.
So like the robot with a computer vision
provides a bunch of candidates
and you kinda finalize the decision.
- Right.
The software engineers
are amazing on this team.
And so they actually provided an interface
where you can essentially use a lasso tool
and select a prime area
of brain real estate,
and it will automatically
avoid the blood vessels
in that region and automatically
place a bunch of targets.
So that allows the human robot operator
to select really good areas of brain
and make dense applications
of targets in those regions,
the regions we think are gonna have
the most high fidelity representations
of finger movements and
arm movement intentions.
- I've seen like images of this.
And for me, with OCD,
it's for some reason a really pleasant,
I think there's a subreddit
called oddly satisfying.
- [Matthew] Yeah, love that subreddit.
- It's oddly satisfying to
see the different target sites
avoiding the blood vessels
and also maximizing
like the usefulness of those
locations for the signal.
It just feels good.
It's like, ah.
- As a person who has a visceral reaction
to the brain bleeding,
I can tell you it's extremely satisfying
watching the electrodes
themselves go into the brain
and not cause bleeding.
- Yeah, yeah.
So you said the feeling was of relief
when everything went perfectly.
- Yeah.
- How deep in the brain
can you currently go
and eventually go, let's
say, on the Neuralink side.
It seems the deeper you go in the brain,
the more challenging it becomes.
- Yeah, so talking broadly
about neurosurgery,
we can get anywhere.
It's routine for me to put deep
brain stimulating electrodes
near the very bottom of the brain,
entering from the top and passing
about a two millimeter wire
all the way into the bottom of the brain.
And that's not revolutionary.
A lot of people do that.
And we can do that with
very high precision.
I use a robot from
Globus to do that surgery
several times a month.
It's pretty routine.
- What are your eyes in that situation?
What are you seeing?
What kind of technology
can you use to visualize
where you are to light your way?
- Yeah, so it's a cool
process on the software side.
You take a preoperative MRI
that's extremely high resolution
data of the entire brain.
You put the patient to sleep,
put their head in a frame
that holds the skull very rigidly,
and then you take a CT scan of their head
while they're asleep with that frame on,
and then merge the MRI
and the CT in software.
You have a plan based on the MRI
where you can see these
nuclei deep in the brain.
You can't see them on CT,
but if you trust the
merging of the two images,
then you indirectly know
on the CT where that is.
And therefore, indirectly know
where in reference to the titanium frame
screwed to their head those targets are.
And so this is '60s
technology to manually compute
trajectories, given the
entry point and target
and dial in some goofy
looking titanium actuators
with a manual actuators with
little tick marks on them.
The modern version of
that is to use a robot.
Just like a little KUKA arm,
you might see it building
cars at the Tesla factory.
This small robot arm can
show you the trajectory
that you intended from the pre-op MRI
and establish a very rigid holder
through which you can drill
a small hole in the skull
and pass a small rigid wire
deep into that area of the brain
that's hollow and put your electrode
through that hollow wire
and then remove all of
that except the electrode.
So you end up with the electrode
very, very precisely placed
far from the skull surface.
Now that's standard
technology that's already,
been out in the world for a while.
Neuralink right now is focused
entirely on cortical targets,
surface targets because
there's no trivial way to get,
say, hundreds of wires
deep inside the brain
without doing a lot of damage.
So your question, what do you see?
Well, I see an MRI on a screen.
I can't see everything
that that DBS electrode
is passing through on its
way to that deep target.
And so it's accepted with this approach
that there's gonna be about
what one in a hundred patients
who have a bleed somewhere in the brain
as a result of passing that wire blindly
into the deep part of the brain.
That's not an acceptable
safety profile for Neuralink.
We start from the position
that we want this to be dramatically
maybe two or three orders of
magnitude safer than that.
Safe enough really that you or I,
without a profound medical problem,
might on our lunch break someday say,
"Yeah, sure, I'll get that.
I'd be meaning to upgrade
to the latest version."
And so the safety constraints
given that are high.
And so we haven't settled
on a final solution
for arbitrarily approaching
deep targets in the brain.
- It's interesting 'cause
like you have to avoid
blood vessels somehow.
Maybe there's creative ways
of doing the same thing,
like mapping out high resolution
geometry of blood vessels
and then you can go in blind.
But how do you map out that
in a way that's like super stable?
There's a lot of interesting
challenges there, right?
- [Matthew] Yeah.
- But there's a lot to do on the surface.
Luckily.
- Exactly.
So we've got vision on the surface.
We actually have made a
huge amount of progress
sewing electrodes into the spinal cord
as a potential workaround
for a spinal cord injury
that would allow a brain-mounted implant
to translate motor intentions
to a spine-mounted implant
that can effect muscle contractions
in previously paralyzed arms and legs.
- That's mind-blowing.
That's just incredible.
So like the effort there
is to try to bridge
the brain to the spinal cord
to the peripheral nervous system.
So how hard is that to do?
- We have that working in
very crude forms in animals.
- That's amazing.
- Yeah, we've done-
- So similar to like with Noland,
where he's able to
digitally move the cursor,
here you're doing the
same kind of communication
but with the actual factors that you have.
- Yeah.
- [Lex] That's fascinating.
- Yeah, so we have anesthetized
animals doing grasp
and moving their legs in
a sort of walking pattern.
Again, early days,
but the future is bright
for this kind of thing.
And people with paralysis
should look forward to that bright future.
They're gonna have options.
- Yeah, and there's a lot
of sort of intermediate
or extra options where you
take like an Optimus robot,
like the arm, and to be
able to control the arm.
The fingers and hands of
the arm as a prosthetic.
- So skeletons are getting better too.
- So skeletons.
Yeah, so that goes hand in hand.
Although I didn't quite understand
until thinking about it deeply
and doing more research about Neuralink,
how much you can do on the digital side.
So this digital telepathy,
I didn't quite understand
that you can really map the intention,
as you described in the hand knob area,
that you can map the intention.
Just imagine it, think about it.
That intention can be mapped
to actual action in the digital world.
And now more and more, so much can be done
in the digital world
that it can reconnect you
to the outside world.
It can allow you to have freedom,
have independence if
you're a quadriplegic.
That's really powerful.
Like you can go really far with that.
- Yeah, our first
participant, he's incredible.
He's breaking world
records left and right.
- And he is having fun
with it, it's great.
Just going back to the
surgery, your whole journey,
you mentioned to me offline,
you have surgery on Monday.
So you're like doing surgery all the time.
- Yeah.
- Maybe the ridiculous question,
what does it take to get good at surgery?
- Practice, repetitions.
Same with anything else.
There's a million ways of
people saying the same thing
and selling books saying it,
but you call it 10,000
hours, you call it, you know,
spend some chunk of your life,
some percentage of your
life focusing on this,
obsessing about getting better at it.
Repetitions, humility, recognizing
that you aren't perfect
at any stage along the way.
Recognizing you've got improvements
to make in your technique.
Being open to feedback and coaching
from people with a different
perspective on how to do it.
And then just the constant
will to do better.
That fortunately, if
you're not a sociopath,
I think your patients bring that with them
to the office visits every day.
They force you to wanna
do better all the time.
- Yeah, to step up.
I mean, it's a real human being,
a real human being that you can help.
- Yeah.
- So every surgery,
even if it's the same exact surgery,
is there a lot of variability
between that surgery
and a different person?
- Yeah, a fair bit.
I mean, a good example for
us is the angle of the skull
relative to the normal
plane of the body axis,
of the skull over hand knob
is pretty wide variation.
I mean, some people
have really flat skulls,
and some people have really steeply
angled skulls over that area.
And that has consequences for
how their head can be fixed
in sort of the frame that we use
and how the robot has
to approach the skull.
Yeah, people's bodies
are built as differently
as the people you see
walking down the street,
as much variability in body
shape and size as you see there.
We see in brain anatomy and skull anatomy,
there are some people who
we've had to kind of exclude
from our trial for having skulls
that are too thick or too thin
or scalp that's too thick or too thin.
I think we have like the
middle 97% or so of people,
but you can't account for all
human anatomy variability.
- How much like mushiness
and messes there,
'cause taking biology classes,
the diagrams are always
really clean and crisp.
Neuroscience, the pictures of neurons
are always really nice and vary.
But whenever I look at
pictures of like real brains,
I don't know what is going on.
- Yeah.
- So how much
are biological systems in reality?
Like how hard is it to
figure out what's going on?
- Not too bad.
Once you really get used to this,
that's where experience
and skill and education
really come into play is if
you stare at a thousand brains,
it becomes easier to kind
of mentally peel back
the, say, for instance, blood vessels
that are obscuring the sulci and gyri,
kind of the wrinkle pattern
of the surface of the brain.
Occasionally, when you're
first starting to do this
and you open the skull, it doesn't match
what you thought you were
gonna see based on the MRI.
And with more experience, you
learn to kind of peel back
that layer of blood vessels
and see the underlying pattern
of wrinkles in the brain
and use that as a landmark
for where you are.
- [Lex] The wrinkles are a landmark?
So like-
- Yeah.
So I was describing hand knob earlier.
That's a pattern of the
wrinkles in the brain.
It's sort of this sort of Greek letter,
omega-shaped area of the brain.
- So you could recognize
the hand knob area.
Like if I show you a thousand brains
and give you like one minute with each,
you'd be like, "Yep, that's that?"
- Sure.
- And so there is some
uniqueness to that area of the brain,
like in terms of the geometry,
the topology of the thing.
- Yeah.
- Where is it about in the-
- So you have this strip of
brain running down the top
called the primary motor area.
And I'm sure you've seen this
picture of the homunculus
laid over the surface of the brain,
the weird little guy with
huge lips and giant hands.
That guy sort of lays with his legs
up at the top of the brain and
face, arm, areas farther down
and then some kind of mouth,
lip, tongue areas farther down.
And so the hand is right in there.
And then the areas that control speech,
at least on the left side of the brain
in most people are just below that.
And so any muscle that you
voluntarily move in your body,
the vast majority of that
references that strip
or those intentions come
from that strip of brain.
And the wrinkle for hand knob
is right in the middle of that.
- And vision is back here.
- Back, yep.
- Also, close to the surface?
- Vision's a little deeper.
And so this gets to your question about
how deep can you get to do vision.
We can't just do the surface of the brain.
We have to be able to go in,
not as deep as we have to go for DBS,
but maybe a centimeter deeper
than we're used to for hand insertions.
And so that's work in progress.
That's a new set of
challenges to overcome.
- By the way, you
mentioned the Utah array.
And I just saw a picture of that,
and that thing looks terrifying.
- [Matthew] Yeah, bed of nails.
- It's because it's rigid.
And then if you look at the
threads, they're flexible.
What can you say that's interesting to you
about the flexible, that kind of approach
of the flexible threads
to deliver the electrodes
next to the neurons?
- Yeah, I mean, the goal
there comes from experience.
I mean, we stand on
the shoulders of people
that made Utah arrays and
used Utah arrays for decades
before we ever even came along.
Neuralink arose, partly this approach
to technology arose out
of a need recognized
after Utah arrays would fail routinely
because the rigid electrodes,
those spikes that are literally hammered
using an air hammer into the brain,
those spikes generate
a bad immune response
that encapsulates the electrode spikes
in scar tissue essentially.
And so one of the projects
that was being worked on
in the Andersen lab at
Caltech when I got there,
was to see if you could use chemotherapy
to prevent the formation of scar.
Things are pretty bad when
you're jamming a bed of nails
into the brain and then
treating that with chemotherapy
to try to prevent scar tissue.
It's like, maybe we've
gotten off track here, guys.
Maybe there's a fundamental
redesign necessary.
And so Neuralink's approach
of using highly flexible,
tiny electrodes avoids
a lot of the bleeding,
avoids a lot of the immune
response that ends up happening
when rigid electrodes are
pounded into the brain.
And so what we see is
our electrode longevity
and functionality and the
health of the brain tissue
immediately surrounding
the electrode is excellent.
I mean, it goes on for years
now in our animal models.
- What do most people not understand
about the biology of the brain?
We mention the vasculature.
That's really interesting.
- I think the most interesting
maybe underappreciated fact
is that it really does
control almost everything.
I mean, I don't know, for
out of the blue example,
imagine you want a lever on fertility,
you wanna be able to turn
fertility on and off.
I mean, there are legitimate
targets in the brain itself
to modulate fertility, say blood pressure.
You wanna modulate blood pressure.
There are legitimate targets
in the brain for doing that.
Things that aren't immediately
obvious as brain problems
are potentially solvable in the brain.
And so I think it's an under-explored
area for primary treatments
of all the things that bother people.
- That's a really fascinating
way to look at it.
Like there's a lot of
conditions we might think
have nothing to do with the brain,
but they might just be symptoms
of something that actually
started in the brain.
The actual source of the problem.
The primary source is
something in the brain.
- Yeah, not always.
I mean, kidney disease is real.
But there are levers you
can pull in the brain
that affect all of these systems.
- There's knobs.
- Yeah.
- On-off switches and knobs in the brain,
from which this all originates.
Would you have a Neuralink
chip implanted in your brain?
- Yeah.
I think use case right
now is use a mouse, right?
I can already do that.
And so there's no value proposition.
On safety grounds alone, sure.
I'll do it tomorrow.
- You say the use case of the mouse,
is it after like researching all this
and part of it is just watching
Noland have so much fun?
If you can get that bits per second
look really high with a mouse,
like being able to interact,
'cause if you think about it, the way,
on the smartphone, the way you swipe,
that was transformational how
you interact with a thing.
It's subtle.
You don't realize it, but
to able to touch a phone
and to scroll with your
finger, that's like,
that changed everything.
People were sure you
need a keyboard to type.
There's a lot of HCI aspects to that
that changed how we
interact with computers.
So there could be a certain
rate of speed with the mouse
that would change everything.
- Yeah.
- It's like you might be able
to just click around a
screen extremely fast.
And that,
I can see myself getting a Neuralink
for much more rapid interaction
with the digital devices.
- Yeah, I think recording
speech intentions from the brain
might change things as well.
The value proposition
for the average person,
a keyboard is a pretty
clunky human interface,
requires a lot of training.
It's highly variable in
the maximum performance
that the average person can achieve.
I think taking that out of the equation
and just having a natural
word to computer interface
might change things for a lot of people.
- It'd be hilarious if that
is the reason people do it.
Even if you have speech to text,
that's extremely accurate,
it currently isn't,
but say it gotten super accurate,
it'd be hilarious if
people went for Neuralink
just so you avoid the
embarrassing aspect of speaking,
like looking like a douche bag speaking
to your phone in public, which is a real,
like that's a real constraint.
- Yeah.
I mean, with a bone conducting case,
that can be an invisible headphone, say,
and the ability to think
words into software
and have it respond to you,
that starts to sound sort of like
embedded super intelligence.
If you can silently ask
for the Wikipedia article
on any subject and have it read to you,
without any observable change
happening in the outside world,
for one thing, standardized
testing is obsolete. (laughs)
- Yeah.
If it's done well in the
UX side, it could change.
I don't know if it transforms society,
but it really can create a kind of shift
in the way we interact
with digital devices
in the way that a smartphone did.
Just having to look into the
safety of everything involved,
I would totally try it
so it doesn't have to go
to some like incredible
thing where you have,
it connects your vision or to some other,
like it connects all over your brain.
That could be like just
connecting to the hand knob.
You might have a lot of
interesting interaction,
human-computer interaction possibilities.
That's really interesting.
- Yeah, and the technology
on the academic side
is progressing at light speed here.
I think there was a really
amazing paper out of UC Davis,
Sergey Stavisky's lab that
basically made a initial solve
of speech decode.
It was something like 125,000 words
that they we're getting with
very high accuracy, which is-
- So you're just thinking the word?
- Yeah.
- Thinking the word
and you're able to get it?
- Yeah.
- Oh boy.
Like you have to have the
intention of speaking it.
- Right.
- So like do the inner voice.
Man, it's so amazing to me
that you can do the intention,
the signal mapping.
All you have to do is just
imagine yourself doing it.
And if you get the feedback
that it actually worked,
you can get really good at that.
Like your brain will first of all adjust
and you develop it like any other skill.
Like touch typing, you develop
in that same kind of way.
To me, it's just really fascinating
to be able to even to play with that.
Honestly, like I would get a Neuralink
just to be able to play with that.
Just to play with the capacity,
the capability of my
mind to learn this skill.
It's like learning the skill of typing
and learning the skill of moving a mouse.
It's another skill of moving the mouse,
not with my physical
body, but with my mind.
- I can't wait to see
what people do with it.
I feel like we're cavemen right now.
We're like banging rocks with a stick
and thinking that we're making music.
At some point, when these
are more widespread,
there's gonna be the equivalent of a piano
that someone can make art with their brain
in a way that we didn't even anticipate.
I'm looking forward to it.
- Give it to like a teenager.
Like anytime I think
I'm good at something,
I'll always go to like, I don't know.
Even with the bit per second
of playing a video game,
you realize you give it to a teenager,
you've given your link to a teenager,
just the large number of them,
the kind of stuff, they get good at stuff.
They're gonna get like
hundreds of bits per second.
Even just with the current technology.
- Probably.
Probably.
- 'Cause it's also addicting,
the number go up aspect of it
of like improving and training,
'cause it is almost like a skill.
And plus, there's the
software on the other end
that adapts to you.
And especially if the
adapting procedure algorithm
becomes better and better and better,
you're like learning together.
- Yeah, we're scratching the
surface on that right now.
There's so much more to do.
- So on the complete other side of it,
you have an RFID chip implanted in you.
- Yeah.
- So I hear, nice.
- Little subtle thing.
- It's a passive device that you use
for unlocking like a
safe with top secrets,
or what do you use it for?
What's the story behind it?
- I'm not the first one.
There's this whole community
of weirdo biohackers
that have done this stuff,
and I think one of the
early use cases was storing
private crypto wallet keys and whatever.
I dabbled in that a bit
and had some fun with it.
- You have some bitcoin
implanted in your body somewhere.
You can't tell where, yeah.
- Yeah, actually, yeah.
(Lex laughing)
It was the modern day equivalent
of finding change in the sofa cushions
after I put some orphan crypto on there
that I thought was worthless
and forgot about it for a few years.
Went back and found that some
community of people loved it
and had propped up the value of it.
And so it had gone up 50 fold.
- Wow.
- So there was a lot
of change in those cushions.
(Lex laughing)
- That's hilarious.
- But the primary use case was mostly
as a tech demonstrator.
It has my business card on it.
You can scan that in by
touching it to your phone.
It opens the front door to my house,
whatever simple stuff.
- It's a cool step.
It's a cool leap to implant
something in your body.
I mean, perhaps, it's a
similar leap to a Neuralink
because for a lot of
people, that kind of notion
of putting something inside
your body, something electronic
inside a biological system is a big leap.
- Yeah, we have a kind
of a mysticism around
the barrier of our skin.
We're completely fine
with knee replacements,
hip replacements, dental implants.
But there's a mysticism still around
the inviable barrier that
the skull represents.
And I think that needs to be treated
like any other pragmatic barrier.
The question isn't, how incredible
is it to open the skull?
The question is, what
benefit can we provide?
- So from all the surgeries you done,
from everything you understand the brain,
how much does neuroplasticity
come into play?
How adaptable is the brain, for example,
just even in the case
of healing from surgery
or adapting to the post-surgery situation.
- The answer that is sad for me
and other people of my demographic is that
plasticity decreases with age.
Healing decreases with age.
I have too much gray hair
to be optimistic about that.
There are theoretical ways
to increase plasticity
using electrical stimulation.
Nothing that is totally proven out
as a robust enough mechanism
to offer widely to people.
But yeah, I think there's
cause for optimism
that we might find something
useful in terms of, say,
an implanted electrode
that improves learning.
Certainly, there's been
some really amazing work
recently from Nicholas
Schiff, Jonathan Baker,
and others who have a cohort of patients
with moderate traumatic brain injury
who have had electrodes placed
in the deep nucleus in the brain
called the centromedian nucleus
or just near central media nucleus.
And when they apply small
amounts of electricity
to that part of the brain,
it's almost like electronic caffeine.
They're able to improve
people's attention and focus.
They're able to improve how
well people can perform a task.
I think in one case, someone
who was unable to work
after the device was turned on,
they were able to get a job.
And that's sort of one of the holy grails
for me with Neuralink and
other technologies like this
is from a purely utilitarian standpoint,
can we make people able
to take care of themselves
and their families economically again?
Can we make it so someone
who's fully dependent
and even maybe requires a
lot of caregiver resources,
can we put them in a position
to be fully independent,
taking care of themselves,
giving back to their communities?
I think that's a very
compelling proposition,
and what motivates a lot of what I do
and what a lot of the people
at Neuralink are working for.
- It's just a cool possibility
that if you put a Neuralink in
there, that the brain adapts,
like the other part of
the brain adapts too.
- Yeah.
- And integrates it.
The capacity of the brain to
do that is really interesting.
Probably unknown to the degree
to which you can do that,
but you're now connecting
an external thing to it,
especially once it's doing stimulation,
like the biological brain
and the electronic brain
outside of it working together.
Like the possibilities there
are really interesting.
It's still unknown but interesting.
It feels like the brain is really good
at adapting to whatever.
- Yeah.
- But of course,
it is a system that by itself is already,
like everything serves a purpose
and so you don't wanna
mess with it too much.
- Yeah, it's like, eliminating a species
from an ecology.
You don't know what the
delicate interconnections
and dependencies are.
The brain is certainly a
delicate, complex beast.
And we don't know every
potential downstream consequence
of a single change that we make.
- Do you see yourself
doing, so you mentioned P1,
surgeries of P2, P3, P4, P5?
Just more and more and more humans.
- I think it's a certain
kind of brittleness
or a failure on the company's side
if we need me to do all the surgeries.
I think something that I would very much
like to work towards is a
process that is so simple
and so robust on the surgery side
that literally anyone could do it.
We wanna get away from
requiring intense expertise
or intense experience to
have this successfully done
and make it as simple and
translatable as possible.
I mean, I would love it if
every neurosurgeon on the planet
had no problem doing this.
I think we're probably far
from a regulatory environment
that would allow people
that aren't neurosurgeons
to do this, but not impossible.
- All right, I'll sign up for that.
Did you ever anthropomorphize
the robot R1?
Like do you give it a name?
Do you see it as like a friend,
as like working together with you?
- I mean, to a certain degree it's-
- Or anatomy who's gonna get the gap.
- To a certain degree, yeah,
it's complex relationship.
- All the good relationships are.
- It's funny when, in the
middle of the surgery,
there's a part of it where I stand
basically shoulder to
shoulder with the robot.
And so if you're in the room
reading the body language,
that's my brother in arms there.
We're working together
on the same problem.
Yeah, I'm not threatened by it.
- Keep telling yourself that. (laughs)
How have all the surgeries that
you've done over the years,
the people you've helped and the stakes,
the high stakes that you've mentioned,
how has that changed your
understanding of life and death?
- Yeah.
It gives you a very visceral sense,
and this makes sound trite,
but it gives you a very visceral sense
that death is inevitable.
On one hand, you are, as a neurosurgeon,
you're deeply involved in these
like just hard to fathom tragedies:
young parents dying, leaving
a four-year-old behind say.
And on the other hand,
it takes the sting out of it a bit because
you see how just mind
numbingly universal death is.
There's zero chance that
I'm going to avoid it.
I know techno optimists right now
and longevity buffs right now
would disagree on that 0.0% estimate.
But I don't see any chance
that our generation is going to avoid it.
Entropy is a powerful force,
and we are very ornate,
delicate, brittle DNA machines
that aren't up to the
cosmic ray bombardment
that we're subjected to.
So on the one hand,
every human that has ever
lived died or will die.
On the other hand, it's just
one of the hardest things
to imagine inflicting on anyone
that you love is having them gone.
I'm sure you've had friends
that aren't living anymore
and it's hard to even think about them.
And so I wish I had arrived
at the point of nirvana
where death doesn't have a sting.
I'm not worried about it,
but I can at least say
that I'm comfortable
with the certainty of it.
If not, having found out how
to take the tragedy out of it
when I think about my
kids either not having me
or me not having them or my wife.
- Maybe I have come to accepting
intellectual certainty of
it, but it may be the pain
that comes with losing
the people you love,
I don't think I've come to understand
the existential aspect of it.
Like that this is gonna end.
And I don't mean like in some trite way.
I mean like, it certainly feels
like it's not going to end.
Like you live life like
it's not going to end.
- [Matthew] Right.
- And the fact that this light
that's shining this consciousness
is going to no longer be,
in one moment, maybe today,
it fills me when I really am able
to load all that in with
Ernest Becker's terror.
Like it's a real fear.
I think people aren't always honest
with how terrifying it is.
I think the more you are able
to really think through it,
the more terrifying it is.
It's not such a simple thing.
Oh well, it's the way life is.
If you really can load that in, it's hard.
But I think that's why the stoics did it,
because it like helps you
get your shit together
and be like, well, the moment,
every single moment you're
alive is just beautiful.
And it's terrifying that it's gonna end,
like almost like you're
shivering in the cold
a child helpless, this kind of feeling.
And then it makes you,
when you have warmth,
when you have the safety,
when you have the love
to really appreciate it.
I feel like sometimes, in your position,
when you mentioned
armor, just to see death,
it might make you not be able to see that,
the finiteness of life,
because if you kept looking
at that, it might break you.
So it's good to know that you're kind of
still struggling with that,
that there's the neurosurgeon
and then there's a human.
And the human is still
able to struggle with that
and feel the fear of that
and the pain of that.
- Yeah, it definitely
makes you ask the question
of how long, how many
of these can you see?
And not say, "I can't do this anymore."
But I mean, you said it well.
I think it gives you an
opportunity to just appreciate
that you're alive today.
And I've got three kids
and an amazing wife
and I'm really happy.
Things are good.
I get to help on a project
that I think matters.
I think it moves us forward.
I'm a very lucky person.
- It's the early steps of a potentially
gigantic leap for humanity.
It's a really interesting one.
And it's cool 'cause like you,
you read about all this stuff in history
where it's like the early days.
I've been reading, before
going to the Amazon,
I would read about explorers
that would go and explore
even the Amazon jungle for the first time.
Those are the early steps.
Or early steps into space,
early steps in any discipline,
in physics and mathematics.
And it's cool 'cause this
is like, on the grand scale,
these are the early steps
into delving deep into the human brain.
So not just observing the brain,
but be able to interact
with the human brain.
It's gonna help a lot of people,
but it also might help us understand
what the hell's going on in there.
- Yeah, I think ultimately,
we wanna give people
more levers that they can pull, right?
Like you wanna give people options.
If you can give someone
a dial that they can turn
on how happy they are,
I think that makes people
really uncomfortable.
But now, talk about major
depressive disorder.
Talk about people that
are committing suicide
at an alarming rate in this country.
And try to justify that queasiness
in that light of you
can give people a knob
to take away suicidal
ideation, suicidal intention.
I would give them that knob.
I don't know how you
justify not doing that.
- Yeah, you can think about like
all the suffering that's
going on in the world.
Like every single human being
that's suffering right now,
it'll be a glowing red dot.
The more suffering, the more it's glowing.
And you just see the
map of human suffering,
and any technology that
allows you to dim that light
of suffering on a grand
scale is pretty exciting,
because there's a lot of people suffering
and most of them suffer quietly.
We look away too often,
and we should remember
those that are suffering,
'cause once again, most of
them are suffering quietly.
- Well, and on a grander
scale, the fabric of society,
people have a lot of complaints about
how our social fabric is working
or not working, how our politics
is working or not working.
Those things are made
of neurochemistry too,
in aggregate, right?
Like our politics is
composed of individuals
with human brains and, the
way it works or doesn't work
is potentially tunable in
the sense that, I don't know,
say remove our addictive behaviors
or tune our addictive
behaviors for social media
or our addiction to outrage,
our addiction to sharing
the most angry political
tweet we can find.
I don't think that leads
to a functional society.
And if you had options
for people to moderate
that maladaptive behavior,
there could be huge benefits to society.
Maybe we could all work together
a little more harmoniously
toward useful ends.
- There's a sweet spot,
like you mentioned,
you don't wanna completely
remove all the dark sides
of human nature 'cause those
kind of are somehow necessary
to make the whole thing work.
But there's a sweet spot.
- Yeah, I agree.
We gotta suffer a little,
just not so much that you lose hope.
- Yeah.
We knew all the surgeries you've done.
Have you seen consciousness in there ever?
Was there like a glowing light?
- I have this sense that I never found it.
Never removed it, like a
dementor in Harry Potter.
I have this sense that
consciousness is a lot less magical
than our instincts wanna claim it is.
It seems to me like a useful
analog for thinking about
what consciousness is in the brain,
is that we have a really
good intuitive understanding
of what it means to, say, touch your skin
and know what's being touched.
I think consciousness is just that level
of sensory mapping applied
to the thought processes
in the brain itself.
So what I'm saying is consciousness
is the sensation of some part
of your brain being active.
So you feel it working.
You feel the part of your brain
that thinks of red things
or winged creatures
or the taste of coffee.
You feel those parts of
your brain being active
the way that I'm feeling my
palm being touched, right?
And that sensory system
that feels the brain working
is consciousness.
- That's so brilliant.
It's the same way, it's
the sensation of touch
when you're touching a thing.
Consciousness is the sensation of you
feeling your brain working,
your brain thinking,
your brain perceiving.
- Which isn't like a
warping of space and time
or some quantum field effect, right?
It's nothing magical.
People always wanna
ascribe to consciousness
something truly different.
And there's this awesome long history
of people looking at whatever the latest
discovery in physics is
to explain consciousness,
because it's the most magical,
the most out there thing
that you can think of.
And people always wanna do
that with consciousness.
I don't think that's necessary.
It's just a very useful
and gratifying way of
feeling your brain work.
- And as we said, it's
one heck of a brain.
- [Matthew] Yeah.
- Everything we see around
us, everything we love,
everything that's beautiful,
it came from brains like these.
- It's all electrical activity
happening inside your skull.
- And I, for one, am grateful
that there's people like you
that are exploring all
the ways that it works
and all the ways it can be made better.
- Thanks, Lex.
- Thank you so much for talking today.
- It's been a joy.
Thanks for listening to this conversation
with Matthew MacDougall.
And now, dear friends,
here's Bliss Chapman,
Brain Interface Software
lead at Neuralink.
You told me that you've
met hundreds of people
with spinal cord injuries or with ALS
and that your motivation
for helping at Neuralink
is grounded in wanting to help them.
Can you describe this motivation?
- Yeah.
First, just a thank you to all the people
I've gotten a chance to speak with,
for sharing their stories with me.
I don't think there's any
world really in which I can
share their stories as
powerful way as they can.
But just I think to summarize
at a very high level
what I hear over and over
again is that people with ALS
or severe spinal cord injury in a place
where they basically can't
move physically anymore,
really at the end of the day
are looking for independence.
And that can mean different
things for different people.
For some folks, it can mean
the ability just to be able
to communicate again
independently without needing
to wear something on their face,
without needing a caretaker
to be able to put
something in their mouth.
For some folks, it can mean
independence to be able
to work again, to be able to
navigate a computer digitally,
efficiently enough to
be able to get a job,
to be able to support themself,
to be able to move out
and ultimately be able to support themself
after their family maybe
isn't there anymore
to take care of them.
And for some folks, it's as simple as
just being able to respond
to their kid in time
before they run away or get
interested in something else.
And these are deeply personal
and sort of very human problems.
And what strikes me again and again
when talking with these folks is that
this is actually an engineering problem.
This is a problem that
with the right resources,
with the right team, we can
make a lot of progress on.
And at the end of the day,
I think that's a deeply inspiring message
and something that makes me
excited to get up every day.
- So it's both an engineering problem
in terms of a BCI, for example,
that can give them capabilities
where they can interact with the world.
But also on the other side,
it's an engineering problem
for the rest of the world
to make it more accessible
for people living with quadriplegia.
- Yeah, and actually,
I'll take a broad view
sort of lens on this for a second.
I think I'm very in favor of anyone
working in this problem space.
So beyond BCI, I'm happy and excited
and willing to support any way I can
folks working on eye tracking systems,
working on speech to text systems,
working on head trackers or
mouse sticks or quad sticks.
And I've met many engineers
and folks in the community
that do exactly those things.
And I think for the people
we're trying to help,
it doesn't matter what the
complexity of the solution is
as long as the problem is solved.
And I wanna emphasize
that there can be many solutions out there
that can help with these problems.
And BCI is one of a
collection of such solutions.
So BCI, in particular,
I think offers several advantages here.
And I think the folks that
recognize this immediately
are usually the people who
have spinal cord injury
or some form of paralysis.
Usually, you don't have to explain to them
why this might be something
that could be helpful.
It's usually pretty self-evident.
But for the rest of us
folks that don't live
with severe spinal cord injury
or who don't know somebody with ALS,
it's not often obvious why
you would want a brain implant
to be able to connect
and navigate a computer.
And it's surprisingly nuanced,
and to the degree that
I've learned a huge amount
just working with Noland in the first
Neuralink clinical trial
and understanding from him
in his words why this
device is impactful for him.
And it's a nuanced topic.
It can be the case that
even if you can achieve
the same thing, for
example, with a mouse stick
when navigating a computer,
he doesn't have access
to that mouse stick every
single minute of the day.
He only has access when
someone's available
to put it in front of him.
And so a BCI can really offer a level
of independence and autonomy
that if it wasn't literally
physically part of your body,
it'd be hard to achieve in any other way.
- So there's a lot of fascinating aspects
to what it takes to get Noland to be able
to control a cursor on
the screen with his mind.
You texted me something that I just love.
You said, "I was part of the team
that interviewed and selected P1.
I was in the operating room
during the first human surgery
monitoring live signals
coming out of the brain.
I work with the user basically every day
to develop new UX paradigm's
decoding strategies.
And I was part of the
team that figured out
how to recover useful BCI
to new world record levels
when the signal quality degraded."
We'll talk about I think
every aspect of that,
but just zooming out, what was it like
to be part of that team
and part of that historic,
I would say, historic first?
- Yeah, I think for me,
this is something I've been excited about
for close to 10 years now.
And so to be able to be
even just some small part
of making it a reality
is extremely exciting.
A couple maybe special moments
during that whole process
that I'll never really truly forget,
one of them is during the actual surgery,
at that point in time, I
know Noland quite well.
I know his family.
And so I think the initial
reaction when Noland
is rolled into the operating room
is just a "oh shit" kind of reaction.
But at that point, muscle memory kicks in
and you sort of go into,
you let your body just do all the talking.
And I have the lucky job in
that particular procedure
to just be in charge of
monitoring the implant.
So my job is to sit there,
to look at the signals
coming off the implant,
to look at the live brain
data streaming off the device
as threads are being
inserted into the brain
and just to basically observe
and make sure that nothing is going wrong
or that there's no red
flags or fault conditions
that we need to go and investigate
or pause the surgery to debug.
And because I had that
sort of spectator view
of the surgery, I had a
slightly removed perspective
than I think most folks in the room.
I got to sit there and think to myself,
"Wow, that brain is moving a lot."
When you look into the
side look craniectomy,
that we stick the threads in,
one thing that most people don't
realize is the brain moves.
The brain moves a lot when you breathe,
when your heart beats, and
you can see it visibly.
So that's something that I
think was a surprise to me
and very, very exciting to be
able to see someone's brain
who you physically know and
have talked with at length
actually pulsing and
moving inside their skull.
- And they use that brain
to talk to you previously,
and now it's right there moving.
- Yep.
- Actually, I didn't realize
that in terms of the thread sending,
so the Neuralink implant
is active during surgery,
and one thread at a time,
you're able to start seeing the signal?
- Yeah.
- So that's part of the way
you test that the thing is working?
- Yeah, so actually in the operating room,
right after we sort of finished
all the thread insertions,
I started collecting what's
called broadband data.
So broadband is basically
the most raw form
of signal you can collect
from a Neuralink electrode.
It's essentially a measurement
of the local field potential
or the, yeah, the voltage essentially
measured by that electrode.
And we have a certain
mode in our application
that allows us to visualize
where detected spikes are.
So it visualizes sort of where,
in the broadband symbol,
and it's very, very raw form of the data
a neuron is actually spiking.
And so one of these moments
that I'll never forget
as part of this whole clinical trial
is seeing live in the operating room,
while he's still under anesthesia,
beautiful spikes being
shown in the application,
just streaming live to a
device I'm holding in my hand.
- So this is no signal
processing the raw data
and then the signals
processings on top of it,
you're seeing the spikes detected?
- [Bliss] Right, yeah.
- And that's a UX too because-
- Yes.
- That looks beautiful as well.
- During that procedure,
there was actually a lot
of cameramen in the room.
So they also were curious
and wanted to see.
There's several neurosurgeons in the room
who are all just excited to
see robots taking their job
and they're all crowded
around a small little iPhone
watching this live brain
data stream out of his brain.
- What was that like seeing the robot
do some of the surgery?
So the computer vision
aspect where it detects
all the spots that avoid the blood vessels
and then obviously with
the human supervision,
then actually doing the
really high precision
connection of the threads to the brain.
- That's a good question.
My answer's gonna be pretty
lame here, but it was boring.
I've seen it so many times.
Yeah, that's exactly how
you want surgery to be.
You want it to be boring,
because I've seen it so many times.
I've seen the robot do the surgery
literally hundreds of times,
and so it was just one more time.
- Yeah, all the practice
surgeries and the proxies
and this is just another day.
- Yep.
- So what about when Noland woke up?
Do you remember a moment where
he was able to move the
cursor, not move the cursor,
but get signal from the brain
such that it was able to show
that there's a connection?
- Yeah, yeah.
So we are quite excited to
move as quickly as we can,
and Noland was really, really
excited to get started.
He wanted to get started
actually the day of surgery,
but we waited till the next
morning very patiently.
So a long night.
And the next morning in the
ICU, where he was recovering,
he wanted to get started and
actually start to understand
what kind of signal we can
measure from his brain.
And maybe for folks who are not familiar
with the Neuralink system, we
implant the Neuralink system
or the Neuralink implant
in the motor cortex.
So the motor cortex is responsible
for representing things like motor intent,
sort of if you imagine
closing and opening your hand,
that kind of signal representation
would be present in the motor cortex.
If you imagine moving
your arm back and forth
or wiggling a pinky, this sort of signal
can be present in the motor cortex.
So one of the ways we
start to sort of map out,
what kind of signal do we
actually have access to
in any particular individual's brain
is through this task called body mapping.
And body mapping is where
you essentially present
a visual to the user and you say,
"Hey, imagine doing this."
And that visual is a 3D
hand opening and closing,
or index finger modulating up and down.
And you ask the user to imagine that,
and obviously, you can't see them do this,
'cause they're paralyzed
so you can't see them
actually move their arm,
but while they do this task,
you can record neural activity,
and you can basically
offline model and check,
can I predict or can I
detect the modulation
corresponding with
those different actions?
And so we did that task and we realized,
hey, there's actually some modulation
associated with some of his hand motion,
which was the first indication that, okay,
we can potentially use that modulation
to do useful things in the world.
For example, control a computer cursor.
And he started playing with it,
the first time we showed him it,
and we actually just
took the same live view
of his brain activity and
put it in front of him.
And we said, "Hey, you
tell us what's going on.
We're not you.
You're able to imagine different things,
and we know that it's
modulating some of these neurons
so you figure out for us
what that is actually representing."
And so he played with it for a bit.
He was like, "I don't quite get it yet."
He played for a bit longer.
And he said, "Oh, when I move this finger,
I see this particular
neuron start to fire more."
And I said, okay, "Prove it, do it again."
And so he said, "Okay,
three, two, one, boom."
And the minute he moved, you
can see like instantaneously
this neuron is firing - single neuron.
I can tell you the exact
channel number if you're interested.
It's stuck in my brain now forever.
But that single channel firing
was a beautiful indication
that it was behaved really
modulated neural activity
that could then be used
for downstream tasks
like decoding a computer cursor.
- And when you say single channel,
is that associated with
a single electrode?
- Yeah, channel electrode
are interchangeable.
- And there's 1,024 of those?
- 1,024, yeah.
- That's incredible that that works.
When I was learning about all
this and like loading it in,
it was just blowing my
mind that the intention,
you can visualize yourself
moving the finger,
that can turn into a signal,
and the fact that you
can then skip that step
and visualize the cursor moving
or have the intention of the cursor moving
and that leading to a signal
that can then be used to move the cursor,
there is so many exciting things there
to learn about the brain,
about the way the brain works,
the very fact of their existing signal
that can be used is really powerful.
But it feels like that's
just like the beginning
of figuring out how that
signal could be used
really, really effectively.
I should also just,
there's so many fascinating details here,
but you mentioned the body mapping step.
At least in the version I saw
that Noland was showing off,
there's like a super nice interface,
like a graphical interface.
But like it just felt like
I was like in the future
'cause it like, you know,
I guess it visualizes you moving the hand.
And there's very like a
sexy, polished interface.
Hello.
I don't know if there's a voice component,
but it just felt like when you wake up
in a really nice video
game and this is a tutorial
at the beginning of that video game.
"This is what you're supposed to do."
It's cool.
- No, I mean, the future
should feel like the future.
- But it's not easy to pull that off.
I mean, it needs to be
simple but not too simple.
- Yeah, and I think the
UX design component here
is underrated for BCI
development in general.
There's a whole interaction effect
between the ways in which you visualize
an instruction to the user
and the kinds of signal you can get back.
And that quality of sort of
your behavioral alignment
to the neural signal is a function
of how good you are at expressing
to the user what you want them to do.
And so yeah, we spend a lot
of time thinking about the UX,
of how we build our applications,
of how the decoder actually functions,
the control surfaces it
provides to the user.
All these little details matter a lot.
- So maybe it'd be nice to get
into a little bit more detail
of what the signal looks like
and what the decoding looks like.
So there's a N1 implant
that has, like we mentioned,
1,024 electrodes and that's
collecting raw data, raw signal.
What does that signal look like,
and what are the different
steps along the way
before it's transmitted,
and what is transmitted,
all that kind of stuff?
- Yeah, yep.
This is gonna be a fun one.
Let's go.
So maybe before diving into what we do,
it's worth understanding
what we're trying to measure,
because that dictates a
lot of the requirements
for the system that we build.
And what we're trying to measure
is really individual neurons
producing action potentials.
And action potential
is, you can think of it
like a little electrical impulse
that you can detect if
you're close enough.
And by being close enough,
I mean, like within
let's say 100 microns of that cell.
And 100 microns is a
very, very tiny distance.
And so the number of neurons
that you're gonna pick up
with any given electrode
is just a small radius
around that electrode.
And the other thing worth understanding
about the underlying biology here
is that when neurons
produce an action potential,
the width of that action potential
is about one millisecond.
So from the start of the
spike to the end of the spike,
that whole width of that sort
of characteristic feature
of a neuron firing is
one millisecond wide.
And if you want to detect
that an individual spike
is occurring or not, you
need to sample that signal
or sample the local full
potential nearby that neuron
much more frequently
than once a millisecond.
You need to sample many,
many times per millisecond
to be able to detect that this is actually
the characteristic waveform
of a neuron producing an action potential.
And so we sample across
all 1,024 electrodes
about 20,000 times a second.
20,000 times a second means
we've already given
one millisecond window.
We have about 20 samples that tell us
what that exact shape of that
action potential looks like.
And once we've sort of
sampled at super high rate
the underlying electrical
field nearby these cells,
we can process that signal into
just where do we detect a
spike or where do we not,
sort of a binary signal one or zero.
Do we detect a spike in
this one millisecond or not?
And we do that because the
actual information carrying
sort of subspace of neural activity
is just when are spikes occurring.
Essentially, everything that we care about
for decoding can be
captured or represented
in the frequency
characteristics of spike trains,
meaning how often are spikes
firing in any given window of time.
And so that allows us to
do sort of a crazy amount
of compression from this very
rich, high density signal
to something that's much, much more sparse
and compressible that can be
sent out over a wireless radio,
like a Bluetooth
communication, for example.
- Quick tangents here.
You mentioned electrode neuron.
There's a local neighborhood
of neurons nearby.
How difficult is it to like isolate
from where the spike came from?
- Yeah, so there's a whole
field of sort of academic
neuroscience work on exactly this problem,
of basically given a single electrode
or given a set of electrodes
measuring a set of neurons,
how can you sort of sort,
spike sort which spikes are
coming from what neuron?
And this is a problem that's
pursued in academic work
because you care about it for
understanding what's going on
in the underlying sort of
neuroscience of the brain.
If you care about understanding
how the brain's representing information,
how that's evolving through time,
then that's a very, very
important question to understand.
For sort of the
engineering side of things,
at least at the current scale,
if the number of neurons per
electrode is relatively small,
you can get away with basically
ignoring that problem completely.
You can think of it like
sort of a random projection
of neurons to electrodes,
and there may be in some cases
more than one neuron per electrode.
But if that number is small enough,
those signals can be thought of as
sort of a union of the two.
And for many applications,
that's a totally reasonable
trade off to make and can
simplify the problem a lot.
And as you sort of
scale out channel count,
the relevance of distinguishing
individual neurons
becomes less important, because
you have more overall signal
and you can start to rely
on sort of correlations
or covariance structure in
the data to help understand
when that channel's firing,
what does that actually represent?
'Cause you know that when
that channel's firing
in concert with these other 50 channels,
that means move left.
But when that same channel's
firing with concert
with these other 10 channels,
that means move right.
- Okay, so you have to do
this kind of spike detection
on board, and you have to
do that super efficiently,
so fast and not use too much power,
'cause you don't wanna be
generating too much heat.
So it has to be a super
simple signal processing step.
- [Bliss] Yeah.
- Is there some wisdom you can share about
what it takes to overcome that challenge?
- Yeah, so we've tried
many different versions
of basically turning this raw signal into
sort of a feature that you
might wanna send off the device.
And I'll say that I don't think
we're at the final step of this process.
This is a long journey.
We have something that
works clearly today,
but there can be many
approaches that we find
in the future that are much better
than what we do right now.
So some versions of what we do right now,
and there's a lot of academic
heritage to these ideas,
so I don't wanna claim
that these are original
Neuralink ideas or anything like that.
But one of these ideas
is basically to build
a sort of like a convolutional
filter almost, if you will,
that slides across the signal
and looks for a certain
template to be matched.
And that template consists
of sort of how deep
the spike modulates, how much it recovers,
and what the duration
and window of time is
that the whole process takes.
And if you can see in the
signal that that template
is matched within certain bounds,
then you can say, "Okay, that's a spike."
One reason that approach
is super convenient
is that you can actually implement that
extremely efficiently in hardware,
which means that you
can run it in low power
across 1,024 channels all at once.
Another approach that we've
recently started exploring,
and this can be combined with
the spike detection approach,
something called spike band power.
And the benefits of that approach
are that you may be able to
pick up some signal from neurons
that are maybe too far away
to be detected as a spike,
because the farther away
you are from an electrode,
the weaker that actual spike waveform
will look like on that electrode.
So you might be able to pick up
population level activity
of things that are
maybe slightly outside the
normal recording radius,
what neuroscientists
sometimes refer to as the hash
of activity, the other
stuff that's going on,
and you can look at sort
of across many channels
how that sort of background
noise is behaving
and you might be able to get more juice
out of the signal that way.
But it comes at a cost.
That signal is now a floating
point representation,
which means it's more expensive
to send out over a power.
It means you have to find
different ways to compress it
that are different than what you can apply
to binary signals.
So there's a lot of different challenges
associated with these
different modalities.
- So also, in terms of communication,
you're limited by the
amount of data you can send.
- [Bliss] Yeah.
- And also, because you're currently using
the Bluetooth protocol, you
have to batch stuff together.
But you have to also do this
keeping the latency crazy low.
Like crazy low.
Anything to say about the latency?
- Yeah, this is a passion project of mine,
so I wanna build the
best mouse in the world.
I don't wanna build like the, you know,
the Chevrolet Spark or
whatever of electric cars.
I wanna build like the Tesla
Roadster version of a mouse.
And I really do think it's quite possible
that within 5 to 10 years,
that most eSports
competitions are dominated
by people with paralysis.
This is like a very real
possibility for number of reasons.
One is that they'll have
access to the best technology
to play video games effectively.
The second is they have the time to do so.
So those two factors together
are particularly potent
for eSport competitors.
- Unless people without paralysis
are also allowed to implant.
- (laughs) Right.
- Which is, it is another way to interact
with a digital device.
And there's something to that,
if it's a fundamentally
different experience,
more efficient experience.
Even if it's not like some kinda
full on high bandwidth communication,
if it's just the ability to
move the mouse 10x faster,
like the bits per second,
if I can achieve a bits per second,
that 10x, what I can do with the mouse,
that's a really interesting
possibility of what that can do,
especially as you get really
good at it with training.
- It's definitely the case
that you have a higher
ceiling performance,
because you don't have
to buffer your intention
through your arm, through your muscle.
You get just, by nature of
having a brain implant at all,
like 75 millisecond
lead time on any action
that you're actually trying to take.
And there's some nuance to this,
like there's evidence
that the motor cortex,
you can sort of plan
out sequences of action
so you may not get that
whole benefit all the time.
But for sort of like
reaction time style games
where you just wanna,
somebody's over here, snipe
'em, that kind of thing.
You actually do have just
an inherent advantage
'cause you don't need
to go through muscle.
So the question is, just how
much faster can you make it?
And we're already than
you what you would do
if you're going through muscle
from a latency point of view,
and we're in the early stage of that.
I think we can push it
sort of our end-to-end
latency right now from brain
spike to cursor movement,
it's about 22 milliseconds.
If you think about the
best mice in the world,
the best gaming mice, that's
about five milliseconds-ish
of latency, depending on how you measure.
Depending how fast your screen refreshes,
there's a lot of characteristics
that matter there.
But yeah, and the rough
time for like a neuron
in the brain to actually impact
your command of your hand
is about 75 millisecond.
So if you look at those numbers,
you can see that we're
already like competitive
and slightly faster than what you'd get
by actually moving your hand.
And this is something that,
if you ask Noland about it,
when he moved the cursor
for the first time,
we asked him about this.
This was something I
was super curious about,
like what does it feel like
when you're modulating,
a click intention or when
you're trying to just move
the cursor to the right.
He said it moves before he is
like actually intending it to,
which is kind of a surreal
thing and something that
I would love to experience myself one day.
What is that like to have that
thing just be so immediate,
so fluid that it feels like it's happening
before you're actually
intending it to move.
- Yeah, I suppose we've
gotten used to that latency,
that natural latency that happens.
So is the currently the
bottleneck, the communication,
so like the Bluetooth communication,
what's the actual bottleneck?
I mean, there's always
gonna be a bottleneck.
What's the current bottleneck?
- Yeah, a couple things.
So kind of hilariously,
Bluetooth low energy protocol
has some restrictions on how
fast you can communicate.
So the protocol itself
establishes a standard
of the most frequent sort
of updates you can send
are on the order of 7.5 milliseconds.
And as we push latency down to the level
of sort of individual
spikes impacting control,
that level of resolution,
that kind of protocol
is gonna become a limiting
factor at some scale.
Another sort of important nuance to this
is that it's not just the Neuralink itself
that's part of this equation.
If you start pushing latency
sort of below the level
of how fast screens refresh,
then you have another problem.
Like you need your whole system
to be able to be as reactive
as the sort of limits of what
the technology can offer.
Like you need the screen like 120 hertz
just doesn't work anymore
if you're trying to have something respond
at something that's at the
level of one millisecond.
- That's a really cool challenge.
I also like that for a T-shirt,
the best mouse in the world.
Tell me on the receiving
end, so the decoding step,
now we figured out what the spikes are,
we got them all together,
now we're sending that over to the app.
What's the decoding step look like?
- Yeah, so maybe first, what is decoding?
I think there's probably
a lot of folks listening
that just have no clue what it means
to decode brain activity.
- Actually, even if we
zoom out beyond that,
what is the app?
So there's an implant that's
wirelessly communicating
with any digital device
that has an app installed.
So maybe can you tell me a
high level what the app is,
what the software is outside of the brain?
- Yeah, so maybe working
backwards from the goal,
the goal is to help
someone with paralysis,
in this case Noland,
be able to navigate his
computer independently.
And we think the best way to do that
is to offer them the
same tools that we have
to navigate our software
because we don't wanna have
to rebuild an entire software
ecosystem for the brain.
At least not yet.
Maybe someday you can imagine there's UXs
that are built natively for BCI.
But in terms of what's
useful for people today,
I think most people would prefer
to be able to just control
mouse and keyboard inputs
to all the applications
that they wanna use for their daily jobs,
for communicating with
their friends, et cetera.
And so the job of the application
is really to translate
this wireless stream
of brain data coming off the implant
into control of the computer.
And we do that by essentially building
a mapping from brain activity
to sort of the HID inputs
to the actual hardware.
So HID is just the protocol
for communicating like
input device events.
So for example, move
mouse to this position
or press this key down.
And so that mapping is fundamentally
what the app is responsible for.
But there's a lot of nuance
of how that mapping works
that we spend a lot of
time to try to get right
and we're still in the early
stages of a long journey
to figure out how to do that optimally.
So one part of that process is decoding.
So decoding is this process
of taking the statistical
patterns of brain data
that's being channeled across
this Bluetooth connection
to the application and turning it into,
for example, a mouse movement.
And that decoding step,
you can think of it
in a couple different parts.
So similar to any
machine learning problem,
there's a training step and
there's an inference step.
The training step in our
case is a very intricate
behavioral process where the user has
to imagine doing different actions.
So for example, they'll
be presented a screen
with a cursor on it and they'll be asked
to push that cursor to the right.
Then imagine pushing that
cursor to the left, push it up,
push it down, and we can
basically build up a pattern
or using any sort of modern ML method,
a mapping of given this brain data
and that imagined behavior
map one to the other.
And then at test time,
you take that same
pattern matching system.
In our case, it's a deep neural network,
and you run it and you
take the live stream
of brain data coming off
their implant, you decode it
by pattern matching to what
you saw at calibration time,
and you use that for a
control of the computer.
Now, a couple like sort of rabbit holes
that are I think are quite interesting,
one of them has to do with how you build
that best template matching system
because there's a variety
of behavioral challenges
and also debugging challenges
when you're working with
someone who's paralyzed.
Because again, fundamentally,
you don't observe what
they're trying to do.
You can't see them attempt
to move their hand.
And so you have to figure out
a way to instruct the user
to do something and validate
that they're doing it correctly
such that then you can
downstream, build with confidence
the mapping between the neural spikes
and the intended action.
And by doing the action correctly,
what I really mean is at
this level of resolution
of what neurons are doing.
So if in ideal world,
you could get a signal
of behavioral intent that
is ground truth accurate
at the scale of sort of
one millisecond resolution,
then with high confidence,
I could build a mapping
from my neuro spikes to
that behavioral intention.
But the challenge is, again,
that you don't observe what
they're actually doing.
And so there's a lot of nuance
to how you build user experiences
that give you more than
just sort of a course
on average correct representation
of what the user's intending to do.
If you want to build
the world's best mouse,
you really want it to be
as responsive as possible.
You want it to be able to do exactly
what the user's intending
at every sort of step
along the way, not just
on average be correct
when you're trying to move
it from left to right.
And building a behavioral
sort of calibration game
or sort of software experience
that gives you that level
of resolution is what we
spend a lot of time working.
- So the calibration process,
the interface has to encourage precision,
meaning like whatever it does,
it should be super intuitive
that the next thing
the human is going to likely
do is exactly that intention
that you need and only that intention.
And you don't have any feedback
except that may be
speaking to you afterwards
what they actually did.
You can't, "Oh yeah."
- Right.
- So that's fundamentally,
that is a really exciting UX challenge,
'cause that's all on the UX.
It's not just about being
friendly or nice or usable.
- Yeah.
- It's like-
- User experience is how it works.
- It's how it works.
- Yeah.
- For the calibration,
and calibration, at least
at this stage of Neuralink,
is like fundamental to
the operation of the thing
and not just calibration
but continued calibration essentially.
- [Bliss] Yeah.
- Wow, yeah.
- You said something
that I think is worth
exploring there a little bit.
You said it's primarily a UX challenge,
and I think a large component of it is,
but there is also a very interesting
machine learning challenge here,
which is given some data set,
including some on average correct behavior
of asking the user to
move up or move down,
move right, move left,
and given a data set of neural spikes,
is there a way to infer in
some kind of semi-supervised
or entirely unsupervised way
what that high resolution
version of their intention is?
And if you think about
it, like there probably is
because there are enough
data points in the dataset,
enough constraints on your
model that there should be a way
with the right sort of formulation
to let the model figure out itself.
For example, at this millisecond,
this is exactly how hard
they're pushing upwards.
And at this millisecond, this is how hard
they're trying to push upwards.
- It's really important to
have very clean labels, yes.
So like the problem becomes much harder
from the machine learning perspective
if the labels are noisy.
- [Bliss] That's correct.
- And then to get the clean
labels, that's a UX challenge.
- Correct, although clean labels,
I think maybe it's worth
exploring what that exactly means.
I think any given labeling strategy
will have some number
of assumptions it makes
about what the user's attempting to do.
Those assumptions can be
formulated in a loss function,
or they can be formulated
in terms of heuristics
that you might use to just try to estimate
or guesstimate what the
user's trying to do.
And what really matters
is how accurate are those assumptions.
For example, you might say,
"Hey, user, push upwards
and follow the speed of this cursor,"
and your heuristic might be
that they're trying to do it
exactly what that cursor's trying to do.
Another competing heuristic might be
they're actually trying
to go slightly faster
at the beginning of the movement
and slightly slower at the end.
And those competing heuristics
may or may not be accurate
reflections of what the
user's trying to do.
Another version of the task might be,
"Hey, user, imagine moving
this cursor a fixed offset.
So rather than follow the cursor,
just try to move it exactly
200 pixels to the right."
So here's the cursor, here's the target.
Okay, cursor disappears.
Try to move that now invisible cursor
200 pixels to the right.
And the assumption in that
case would be that the user
can actually modulate
correctly that position offset,
but that position offset assumption
might be a weaker
assumption, and therefore,
potentially you can make it more accurate
than these heuristics that
are trying to guesstimate
at each millisecond what
the user's trying to do.
So you can imagine different tasks
that make different
assumptions about the nature
of the user intention and
those assumptions being correct
is what I would think of as a clean label.
- For that step, what are we
supposed to be visualizing?
There's a cursor and you
wanna move that cursor
to the right or the left or up and down
or maybe move them by a certain offset.
So that's one way, is that the
best way to do calibration?
So for example, an alternative crazy way
that probably is playing a role here
is a game like Webgrid,
where you're just getting a
very large amount of data,
the person playing a game,
where if they're in a state of flow,
maybe you can get clean
signal as a side effect.
- [Bliss] Yep.
- Is that not an effective
way for initial calibration?
- Yeah, great question.
There's a lot to unpack there.
So the first thing I
would draw a distinction
between a sort of open
loop, first closed loop.
So open loop, what I mean by that
is the user is sort of
going from zero to one.
They have no model at all,
and they're trying to get to the place
where they have some
level of control at all.
In that setup, you really
need to have some task
that gives the user a hint
of what you want them to do
such that you can build this mapping again
from brain data to output.
Then once they have a model,
you could imagine them
using that model and
actually adapting to it
and figuring out the right
way to use it themself
and then retraining on that data
to give you sort of a
boost in performance.
There's a lot of challenges associated
with both of these techniques
and we can sort of rabbit hole
into both of 'em, if you're interested.
But the sort of challenge
with the open loop task
is that the user themself doesn't get
proprioceptive feedback
about what they're doing.
They don't necessarily perceive themself
or feel the mouse under their hand
when they're using an open,
when they're trying to do
an open loop calibration.
They're being asked to perform something.
Like imagine if you sort of
had your whole right arm numbed
and you stuck it in a box
and you couldn't see it.
So you had no visual feedback
and you had no proprioceptive feedback
about what the position or
activity of your arm was.
And now you're asked, okay,
given this thing on the screen
that's moving from left to
right, match that speed.
And you basically can
try your best to invoke
whatever that imagined
action is in your brain
that's moving the cursor
from left to right.
But in any situation,
you're gonna be inaccurate
and maybe inconsistent
in how you do that task.
And so that's sort of the fundamental
challenge of open loop.
The challenge with closed loop is that,
once the user's given a model,
and they're able to start
moving the mouse on their own,
they're going to very
naturally adapt to that model.
And that co-adaptation
between the model learning,
what they're doing, and the user learning
how to use the model may
not find you the best
sort of global minima.
And maybe that your first
model was noisy in some ways
or maybe just had some like quirk,
like if there's some like
part of the data distribution
that didn't cover super well,
and the user now figures out
because they're a
brilliant user like Noland.
They figured out the right
sequence of imagined motions
or the right angle they
have to hold their hand at
to get it to work.
And they'll get it to work great,
but then the next day, they
come back to their device
and maybe they don't remember exactly
all the tricks that they
used the previous day.
And so there's a complicated
sort of feedback cycle here
that can emerge and can make it
a very, very difficult debugging process.
- Okay, there's a lot of really
fascinating things there.
Yeah, actually, just to
stay on the closed loop,
I've seen situations,
this actually happened
watching psychology grad students.
They use piece of software
when they don't know
how to program themselves.
They use piece of software
that somebody else wrote,
and it has a bunch of bugs.
And they figure out like,
and they've been using it for years.
They figured out ways to work around it.
Oh, that just happens.
Like nobody like considers
maybe we should fix this.
They just adapt.
And that's a really interesting notion,
that we were really good at
adapting, but you need to still,
that might not be the optimal.
Okay, so how do you solve that problem?
Do you have to restart from scratch
every once in a while kind of thing?
- Yeah, it's a good question.
First and foremost, I would say
this is not a solved problem.
And for anyone who's listening in academia
who works on BCIs, I would
also say this is not a problem
that's solved by simply
scaling channel account.
Maybe that can help and you can get
sort of richer covariance structures
that you can use to exploit
when trying to come up with
good labeling strategies.
But if you're interested in problems,
that aren't gonna be solved inherently
by scaling channel account,
this is one of them.
Yeah, so how do you solve it?
It's not a solved problem.
That's the first thing I
wanna make sure gets across.
The second thing is, any solution
that involves closed loop
is going to become a very
difficult debugging problem.
And one of my sort of general
heuristics for choosing
what prompts to tackle is
that you wanna choose the one
that's gonna be the easiest to debug,
'cause if you can do that,
even if the ceiling is
lower, you're gonna be able
to move faster because you have a tighter
iteration loop debugging the problem.
And in the open loop setting,
there's not a feedback cycle debug
with the user in the loop.
And so there's some reason to think
that that should be an
easier debugging problem.
The other thing that's worth understanding
is that even in a closed loop setting,
there's no special software
magic of how to infer
what the user is truly attempting to do.
In the closed loop setting,
although they're moving
the cursor on the screen, they
may be attempting something
different than what your
model is outputting.
So what the model is
outputting is not a signal
that you can use to retrain
if you want to be able
to improve the model further.
You still have this very
complicated guesstimation
or unsupervised problem of figuring out
what is the true user intention
underlying that signal.
And so the open loop problem
has the nice property
of being easy to debug.
And the second nice property of,
it has all the same
information and content
as the closed loop scenario.
Another thing I wanna mention and call out
is that this problem
doesn't need to be solved
in order to give useful control to people.
Even today with the solutions we have now
and that academia has
built up over decades,
the level of control that can be given
to a user today is quite useful.
It doesn't need to be solved
to get to that level of control.
But again, I wanna build
the world's best mouse.
I wanna make it so good
that it's not even a
question that you want it.
And to build the world's best
mouse, the superhuman version,
you really need to nail that problem.
And a couple maybe details
of previous studies
that we've done internally that
I think are very interesting
to understand when thinking
about how to solve this problem,
the first is that even when
you have ground truth data
of what the user's trying to do,
and you can get this with
an able-bodied monkey,
a monkey that has a
Neuralink device implanted
and moving a mouse to control a computer,
even with that ground truth dataset,
it turns out that the
optimal thing to predict
to produce high performance BCI
is not just the direct
control of the mouse.
You can imagine building dataset
of what's going on in the brain
and what is the mouse
exactly doing on the table.
And it turns out that
if you build the mapping
from neuro spikes to predict exactly
what the mouse is doing,
that model will perform
worse than a model that
is trained to predict
sort of higher level assumptions
about what the user might be trying to do.
For example, assuming
that the monkey is trying
to go in a straight line to the target,
it turns out that making those assumptions
is actually more effective
in producing a model
than actually predicting
the underlying hand movement.
- So the intention,
not like the physical
movement or whatever.
- Yeah.
- There's obviously
a really strong correlation
between the two,
but the intention is a more
powerful thing to be chasing.
- [Bliss] Right.
- Well, that's also super interesting.
I mean, the intention
itself is fascinating,
because yes, with the BCI here,
in this case, with a digital telepathy,
you're acting on the
intention, not the action,
which is why there's an experience
of like feeling like it's happening
before you meant for it to happen.
That is so cool.
And that is why you could achieve
like superhuman performance problem
in terms of the control of the mouse.
So for open loop, just to clarify,
so whenever the person is tasked
to like move the mouse to the right,
you said there's not feedback
so they don't get to get that satisfaction
of like actually getting
it to move, right?
- You could imagine giving
the user feedback on a screen,
but it's difficult, because at this point,
you don't know what
they're attempting to do.
So what can you show them
that would basically give them
a signal of I'm doing this
correctly or not correctly.
So let's take this very specific example.
Like maybe your calibration
task looks like you're trying
to move the cursor a
certain position offset.
So your instructions to the user are,
"Hey, the cursor's here.
Now, when the cursor disappears,
imagine moving it 200
pixels from where it was
to the right to be over this target."
In that kind of scenario,
you could imagine coming up
with some sort of consistency
metric that you could display
to the user of, "Okay, I
know what the spike train
looks like on average when you
do this action to the right.
Maybe I can produce some sort
of probabilistic estimate
of how likely is that to
be the action you took
given the latest trial or
trajectory that you imagined."
And that could give the
user some sort of feedback
of how consistent are they
across different trials.
You could also imagine that
if the user is prompted
with that kind of consistency metric,
that maybe they just become
more behaviorally engaged to begin with
because the task is kind of boring
when you don't have any feedback at all.
And so there may be benefits
to the user experience
of showing something on the screen,
even if it's not accurate,
just because it keeps
the user motivated to try to increase
that number or push it upwards.
- So there's a psychology element here.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- And again, all of that is UX challenge.
How much signal drift is there,
hour to hour, day to day,
week to week, month to month?
How often do you have to recalibrate
because of the signal drift?
- Yeah, so this is a
problem we've worked on,
both with NHP, non-human primates,
before our clinical trial
and then also with Noland
during the clinical trial.
Maybe the first thing that's worth stating
is what the goal is here.
So the goal is really to enable the user
to have a plug and play experience
where I guess they don't
have to plug anything in,
but a play experience where they can use
the device whenever they want
to, however they want to.
And that's really what we're aiming for.
And so there can be a set of solutions
that get to that state without considering
this non-stationary problem.
So maybe the first solution
here that's important
is that they can recalibrate
whenever they want.
This is something that Noland
has the ability to do today.
So he can recalibrate the system
at 2:00 AM in the middle of the night,
without his caretaker or
parents or friends around
to help push a button for him.
The other important part
of the solution is that
when you have a good model calibrated,
that you can continue using that
without needing to recalibrate it.
So how often he has to do
this recalibration today
depends really on his
appetite for performance.
We observe sort of a
degradation through time
of how well any individual model works,
but this can be mitigated behaviorally
by the user adapting
their control strategy.
It can also be mitigated
through a combination
of sort of software features
that we provide to the user.
For example, we let
the user adjust exactly
how fast the cursor is moving.
We call that the gain, for example,
the gain of how fast the cursor reacts
to any given input intention.
They can also adjust the smoothing,
how smooth the output of that
cursor intention actually is.
They can also adjust the friction,
which is how easy is it
to stop and hold still.
And all these software tools
allow the user a great deal
of flexibility and
troubleshooting mechanisms
to be able to solve this problem
for themselves.
- By the way,
all of this is done by looking
to the right side of the screen,
selecting the mixer,
and the mixer you have-
- It's like DJ mode.
DJ mode for your VCI.
- So I mean, it's a really
well done interface.
It's really, really well done.
And so yeah, there's that bias
that there's a cursor drift
that Noland talked about in a stream,
although he said that you
guys were just playing around
with it with him and then
constantly improving.
So that could have been just a snapshot
of that particular
moment, a particular day.
But he said that there
was this cursor drift
and this bias that
could be removed by him,
I guess looking to the
right side of the screen,
the left side of the screen
to kind of adjust the bias.
- Yeah, yeah.
- That's one interface
action I guess to adjust the bias.
- Yeah, so this is actually an idea
that comes out of academia.
There are some prior work
with sort of BrainGate
clinical trial participants
where they pioneered
this idea of bias correction.
The way we've done it I think is,
yeah, it's very prototized,
very beautiful user experience
where the user can essentially
flash the cursor over to
the side of the screen
and it opens up a window
where they can actually
sort of adjust or tune exactly
the bias of the cursor.
So bias maybe, for people
who aren't familiar,
is just sort of what is the default motion
of the cursor if you're imagining nothing.
And it turns out that
that's one of the first
sort of qualia of the
cursor control experience
that's impacted by neuro non-stationarity.
- Quality off the cursor experience.
- I don't know how else to describe it.
I'm not the guy moving-
- It's very poetic, I love it.
The quality of the cursor experience.
Yeah, I mean, it sounds poetic
but it is deeply true.
There is an experience,
when it works well,
it is a joyful, a really
pleasant experience.
And when it doesn't work well,
it's a very frustrating experience.
That's actually the art of UX.
It's like you have the
possibility to frustrate people
or the possibility to give them joy,
- And at the end of the day,
it really is truly the case
that UX is how the thing works.
And so it's not just like
what's showing on the screen,
it's also what control surfaces
does a decode provide the user?
Like we want them to feel
like they're in the F1 card,
not like some like minivan, right?
And that really truly is
how we think about it.
Noland himself is an F1 fan,
so we refer to ourself as a pit crew.
He really is truly the F1 driver,
and there's different control surfaces
that different kinds of cars
and airplanes provide the user.
And we take a lot of inspiration
from that when designing
how the cursor should behave..
And what maybe one nuance of this is,
even details like when you move a mouse
on a MacBook track pad,
the sort of response curve
of how that input that
you give the track pad
translates to cursor movement is different
than how it works with a mouse.
When you move on the track pad,
there's a different response function,
a different curve to how much
a movement translates to input
to the computer than when you
do it physically with a mouse.
And that's because somebody
sat down a long time ago
when they're designed
the initial input systems
to any computer and they
thought through exactly
how it feels to use
these different systems.
And now we're designing
sort of the next generation
of this input system to a
computer, which is entirely done
via the brain, and there's
no proprioceptive feedback.
Again, you don't feel
the mouse in your hand,
you don't feel the keys
under your fingertips,
and you want a control surface
that still makes it easy
and intuitive for the user to understand
the state of the system
and how to achieve what
they wanna achieve.
And ultimately, the end goal
is that that UX is completely,
it fades into the background.
It becomes something that's
so natural and intuitive
that it's subconscious to the user,
and they just should feel
like they have basically
direct control over the cursor.
It just does what they want it to do.
They're not thinking
about the implementation
of how to make it do
what they want it to do.
It's just doing what they want it to do.
- Is there some kind of things
along the lines of like Fitts' law
where you should move the
mouse in a certain kind of way
that maximizes your
chance to hit the target?
I don't even know what I'm asking,
but I'm hoping the
intention of my question
will land on a profound answer.
No, is there some kind of understanding
of the laws of UX when
it comes to the context
of somebody using their
brain to control it?
Like that's different
than actual with a mouse?
- I think we're in the early stages
of discovering those
laws, so I wouldn't claim
to have solved that problem yet.
But there's definitely
some things we've learned
that make it easier for
the user to get stuff done.
And it's pretty straightforward
when you verbalize it,
but it takes a while to
actually get to that point
when you're in the process of debugging
the stuff in the trenches.
One of those things is that
any machine learning system
you build has some number of errors,
and it matters how those errors translate
to the downstream user experience.
For example, if you're
developing a search algorithm
in your photos, if you
search for your friend Joe
and it pulls up a photo
of your friend Josephine,
maybe that's not a big deal
because the cost of an error
is not that high.
In a different scenario
where you're trying to
detect insurance fraud
or something like this and
you're directly sending someone
to court because of some
machine learning model output,
then the errors make a lot
more sense to be careful about.
You wanna be very thoughtful about
how those errors translate
to downstream effects.
The same is true in BCI.
So for example, if you're building a model
that's decoding a velocity
output from the brain
versus an output where
you're trying to modulate
the left click, for example.
These have sort of different trade-offs
of how precise you need to be
before it becomes useful to the end user.
For velocity, it's okay
to be on average correct,
because the output of the model
is integrated through time.
So if the user's trying
to click at position A,
and they're currently in position B,
they're trying to navigate over time
to get between those two points.
And as long as the output of the model
is on average correct,
they can sort of steer it
through time with the user
control loop in the mix.
They can get to the
point they wanna get to.
The same is not true of a click.
For a click, you're
performing it almost instantly
at the scale of neurons firing.
And so you want to be very
sure that that click is correct
because a false click can be
very destructive to the user.
They might accidentally close
the tab that they're trying
to do something and
lose all their progress.
They might accidentally like
hit some Send button on some text
that it's only like half-composed
and reads funny after.
So there's different
sort of cost functions
associated with errors in this space.
And part of the UX design is understanding
how to build a solution
that is when it's wrong,
still useful to the end user.
- It's so fascinating that assigning cost
to every action when an error occurs.
So every action, if an error
occurs, has a certain cost,
and incorporating that into how
you interpret the intention,
mapping it to the action
is really important.
I didn't quite until you said it realize
there's a cost to like
sending the text early.
It's like very expensive cost.
- Yeah.
It's super annoying if you accidentally,
like if you're a cursor,
imagine if your cursor misclick
every once in a while,
that's like super obnoxious.
And the worst part of it is, usually,
when the user's trying to click,
they're also holding still
because they're over the
target they wanna hit
and they're getting ready to click,
which means that in the data
sets that we build, on average,
it's the case that sort of low speeds
or desire to hold still.
It's correlated with when the
user's attempting to click.
- Wow, that is really fascinating.
- It's also not the case.
People think that, "Oh, a
click is a binary signal.
This must be super easy to decode."
Well, yes it is,
but the bar is so much higher for it
to become a useful thing for the user,
and there's ways to solve this.
I mean, you can sort of take
the compound approach of,
well, let's just give the like,
let's take five seconds to click.
Let's take a huge window of time
so it can be very
confident about the answer.
But again, world's best mouse.
The world's best mouse
doesn't take a second to click
or 500 milliseconds to click.
It takes five milliseconds
to click or less.
And so if you're aiming
for that kind of high bar,
then you really wanna solve
the underlying problem.
- So maybe this is a
good place to ask about
how to measure performance,
this whole bits per second.
Can you like explain
what you mean by that?
Maybe a good place to start
is to talk about Webgrid as a game,
as a good illustration of the
measurement of performance.
- Yeah, maybe I'll take
one zoom out step there,
which is just explaining why
we care to measure this at all.
So again, our goal is to
provide the user the ability
to control the computer as well as I can
and hopefully better.
And that means that they can do it
at the same speed as what I can do.
It means that they have access
to all the same functionality that I have,
including all those little
details like command tab,
command space, all this stuff.
They need to be able to
do it with their brain
and with the same level of reliability
as what I can do with my muscles.
And that's a high bar.
And so we intend to measure and quantify
every aspect of that to understand
how we're progressing towards that goal.
There's many ways to
measure BPS, by the way.
This isn't the only way,
but we present the user
a creative targets, and basically,
we compute a score which
is dependent on how fast
and accurate they can select,
and then how small are the targets.
And the more targets
that are on the screen,
the smaller they are,
the more information
you present per click.
And so if you think about
it from information theory
point of view, you can communicate
across different information
theoretic channels.
And one such channel is a typing interface
you could imagine that's
built out of a grid,
just like a software
keyboard on the screen.
And bits per second is a
measure that's computed
by taking the log of the number
of targets on the screen.
You can subtract one if you
care to model a keyboard
because you have to subtract one
for the Delete key on the keyboard,
but log of the number
of targets on the screen
times the number of correct
selections minus incorrect,
divided by some time window.
For example, 60 seconds.
And that's sort of the standard way
to measure a cursor
control task in academia.
And all credit in the world
goes to this great professor,
Dr. Shenoy of Stanford who
came up with that task.
And he's also one of my
inspirations for being in the field.
So all the credit in the world to him
for coming up with a standardized metric
to facilitate this kind of
bragging rights that we have now,
to say that Noland is
the best in the world
at this task with his BCI.
It's very important for progress
that you have standardized
metrics that people can compare
across different
techniques and approaches.
How well does this do?
So yeah, big kudos to him and
to all the team at Stanford.
Yeah, so for Noland, and
for me playing this task,
there's also different modes
that you can configure this task.
So the Webgrid task can be presented
as just sort of a left
click on the screen,
or you could have targets
that you just dwell over,
or you could have targets
that you left, right click on.
You could have targets
that are left, right click,
middle click, scrolling,
clicking, and dragging.
You could do all sorts of things
within this general framework.
But the simplest, purest
form is just blue targets
show up on the screen.
Blue means left click.
That's the simplest form of the game.
And the sort of prior
records here in academic work
and at Neuralink internally
with sort of NPS have all been matched
or beaten by Noland with
his Neuralink device.
So sort of prior to Neuralink,
the sort of world record
for a human using device
is somewhere between
4.2 to 4.6 BPS, depending on exactly
what paper you read and
how you interpret it.
Noland's current record is 8.5 BPS.
And again, this sort of median
Neuralink performance is 10 BPS.
So you can think of it roughly as he's 85%
the level of control
of a median Neuralinker
using their cursor to select
blue targets on the screen.
And yeah, I think there's a
very interesting journey ahead
to get us to that same
level of 10 BPS performance.
It's not the case that sort
of the tricks that got us
from four to six BPS,
and then six to eight BPS
are gonna be the ones that
get us from eight to 10.
And in my view, the core challenge here
is really the labeling problem.
It's how do you understand at
a very, very fine resolution
what the user's attempting to do.
And yeah, I highly encourage folks
in academia to work on this problem.
- What's the journey
with Noland on that quest
of increasing the BPS on Webgrid?
In March, you said that he selected
89,285 targets in Webgrid.
- Yep.
- So he loves this game.
He's really serious about improving
his performance in this game.
So what is that journey
of trying to figure out
how to improve that performance?
How much can that be done
on the decoding side?
How much can that be done
on the calibration side?
How much can that be
done on the Noland side
of like figuring out how to convey
his intention more cleanly?
- Yeah, no, this is a great question.
So in my view, one of
the primary reasons why
Noland's performance is so
good is because of Noland.
Noland is extremely
focused and very energetic.
He'll play Webgrid sometimes
for like four hours
in the middle of the night.
Like from 2:00 AM to 6:00
AM, he'll be playing Webgrid,
just because he wants to push it
to the limits of what he can do.
And this is not us like
asking him to do that.
I wanna be clear.
Like we're not saying,
"Hey, you should play Webgrid tonight."
We just gave him the game
as part of our research,
and he is able to play it independently
and practice whenever he wants,
and he really pushes hard to push it,
the technology's the absolute limit.
And he views that as like his job really
to make us be the bottleneck.
And boy, has he done that well.
And so the first thing
to acknowledge is that
he's extremely motivated
to make this work.
I've also had the privilege to meet other
clinical trial participants
from BrainGate and other trials,
and they very much
shared the same attitude
of like they view this
as their life's work
to advance the technology
as much as they can.
And if that means selecting
targets on the screen
for four hours from 2:00 AM
to 6:00 AM, then so be it.
And there's something
extremely admirable about that
that's worth calling out.
Okay, so then how do you sort of get from
where he started, which is
no cursor control to a BPS?
So I mean, when he started,
there's a huge amount of learning to do
on his side and our side to figure out
what's the most intuitive control for him.
And the most intuitive
control for him is sort of,
you have to find the set intersection
of what do we have this signal to decode.
So we don't pick up every single
neuron in the motor cortex,
which means we don't have representation
for every part of the body.
So there may be some
signals that we have better
sort of decode performance on than others.
For example, on his left hand,
we have a lot of difficulty
distinguishing his left ring finger
from his left middle finger.
But on his right hand,
we have a good control
and good modulation
detected from the neurons
that we're able to record for his pinky,
his thumb, and his index finger.
So you can imagine how these different
sub spaces of modulated activity
intersect with what's the
most intuitive for him.
And this has evolved over time.
So once we gave him the ability
to calibrate models on his own,
he was able to go and explore
various different ways
to imagine controlling the cursor.
For example, he could imagine
controlling the cursor
by wiggling his wrist side to side,
or by moving his entire arm.
I think at one point, he did his feet.
He tried like a whole bunch
of stuff to explore the space
of what is the most natural way for him
to control the cursor.
That at the same time, it's
easy for us to decode rules.
- Just to clarify, it's through
the body mapping procedure
that you're able to figure
out which finger he can move?
- Yes, yeah, that's one way to do it.
Maybe one nuance of when he's doing it,
he can imagine many more things
than we represent in that
visual on the screen.
So we show him sort of
abstractly, "Here's a cursor.
You figure out what
works the best for you."
And we obviously have hints
about what will work best
from that body mapping procedure
of we know that this particular action,
we can represent well.
But it's really up to
him to go and explore
and figure out what works the best.
- But at which point does
he no longer visualize
the movement of his body
and is just visualizing
the movement of the cursor?
- Yeah.
- How quickly does he go from,
how quickly does he get there?
- So this happened on a Tuesday.
I remember this day very clearly,
because at some point during the day,
it looked like he wasn't doing super well.
It looked like the model
wasn't performing super well
and he was like getting distracted.
But he actually, it wasn't the case.
Like what actually happened
was he was trying something new
where he was just controlling the cursor.
So he wasn't imagining
moving his hand anymore.
He was just imagining,
I don't know what it is,
some like abstract intention
to move the cursor on the screen.
And I cannot tell you what the difference
between those two things are.
I really truly cannot.
He's tried to explain it to me before.
I cannot give a first person
account of what that's like.
But the expletives that
he uttered in that moment
were enough to suggest
that it was a very qualitatively
different experience
for him to just have direct
neural control over a cursor.
- I wonder if there's a way through UX
to encourage a human
being to discover that,
because he discovered
it, like you said to me,
that he's a pioneer.
So he discovered that on
his own through all of this,
the process of trying to move the cursor
with different kinds of intentions.
But that is clearly a really
powerful thing to arrive at,
which is to let go of trying
to control the fingers
and the hand and control the actual
digital device with your mind.
- That's right, UX is how it works.
And the ideal UX is one
that the user doesn't
have to think about what they need to do
in order to get it done.
It just does it.
- That is so fascinating.
But I wonder on the biological side
how long it takes for the brain to adapt.
- Yeah.
- So is it just simply
learning like high level software,
or is there like a
neuroplasticity component
where like the brain is adjusting slowly?
- Yeah, the truth is, I don't know.
I'm very excited to see with
sort of the second participant
that we implant what the
journey is like for them,
because we'll have learned a lot more.
Potentially, we can help them understand
and explore that direction more quickly.
This is something I didn't know.
This wasn't me prompting
Noland to go try this.
He was just exploring
how to use his device
and figure it out himself.
But now that we know that
that's a possibility,
that maybe there's a way to, for example,
hint the user, "Don't try
super hard during calibration.
Just do something that feels natural,
or just directly control the cursor.
Don't imagine explicit action."
And from there, we should be
able to hopefully understand
how this is for somebody
who has not experienced that before.
Maybe that's the default
mode of operation for them.
You don't have to go through this
intermediate phase of explicit motions.
- Or maybe if that naturally
happens for people,
you can just occasionally encourage them
to allow themselves to move the cursor.
Actually sometimes, just
like with a four minute mile,
just the knowledge that that's possible.
- Pushes you to do it.
- Yeah, enables you to do it,
and then it becomes trivial.
And then it also makes you wonder,
it's the cool thing about humans.
Once there's a lot more
human participants,
they will discover
things that are possible.
- Yes, and share their experiences.
- Yeah, and share.
- With each other.
- And that because of them sharing it,
they'll be able to do it.
All of a sudden, that's
unlocked for everybody,
because just the knowledge sometimes
is the thing that enables it to do it.
- Yeah, I mean, and just
to comment on that too,
we've probably tried like
a thousand different ways
to do various aspects of decoding,
and now we know like what
the right subspace is
to continue exploring further.
Again, thanks to Noland
and the many hours he's put into this.
And so even just that help,
like help constraints
sort of the beam search
of different approaches
that we could explore
really helps accelerate
for the next person
the set of things that
we'll get to try on day one,
how fast we hope to get
them to useful control,
how fast we can enable 'em
to use it independently,
and to get value out of the system.
So yeah, massive hats off to Noland
and all the participants
that came before him
to make this technology a reality.
- So how often are the
updates to the decoder?
'Cause Noland mentioned like,
okay, there's a new update
that we're working on,
and that in the stream, he said
he plays the snake game
because it's like super hard.
It's a good way for him to test
like how good the update is.
And he says like sometimes the
update is a step backwards.
It's a constant like iteration.
Like what does the update entail?
Is it mostly on the decoder side?
- Yeah, a couple comments.
So one is it's probably
worth drawing distinction
between sort of research sessions
where we're actively
trying different things
to understand like what
the best approach is
versus sort of independent
use where we wanted to have
an ability to just go use the device,
how anybody would wanna use their MacBook.
And so what he's referring to is,
I think usually in the
context of a research session,
where we're trying many,
many different approaches
to even unsupervised approaches
like we talked about earlier
to try to come up with better ways
to estimate his true intention
and more accurately decode it.
And in those scenarios, I mean we try,
in any given session, he'll sometimes work
for like eight hours a day.
And so that can be hundreds
of different models
that we would try in that day.
Like a lot of different things.
Now, it's also worth noting that we update
the application he uses quite frequently.
I think sometimes, up to like
four or five times a day.
We'll update his application
with different features
or bug fixes or feedback
that he's given us.
He's a very articulate person
who is part of the solution.
He's not a complaining person.
He says, "Hey, here's this
thing that I've discovered
is not optimal in my flow.
Here's some ideas how to fix it.
Let me know what your thoughts are.
Let's figure out how to solve it."
And it often happens that
those things are addressed
within a couple hours of
him giving us his feedback.
That's the kind of
iteration cycle we'll have.
And so sometimes, at the
beginning of the session,
he'll give us feedback, and
at the end of the session,
he's giving us feedback
on the next iteration
of that process or that set up.
- That's fascinating,
because one of the things
you mentioned, that there
was 271 pages of notes
taken from the BCI sessions,
and this was just in March.
So one of the amazing
things about human beings
that they can provide,
especially ones who are smart
and excited and all like positive
and good vibes like Nolan,
that they can provide
feedback, continuous feedback.
- Yeah, it also requires,
just to brag on the team a little bit,
I work with a lot of exceptional people,
and it requires the team
being absolutely laser focused
on the user and what will
be the best for them.
And it requires like a
level of commitment of,
"Okay, this is what the user feedback was.
I have all these meetings.
We're gonna skip that today
and we're gonna do this."
That level of focus
commitment is, I would say,
underappreciated in the world.
And also, you obviously
have to have the talent
to be able to execute on
these things effectively.
And yeah, we have that in loads.
- Yeah, and this is such a
interesting space of UX design
because there's so many unknowns here.
And I can tell UX is difficult
because of how many people do it poorly.
It's just not a trivial thing.
- Yeah, it's also, you know,
UX is not something that
you can always solve
by just constant iterating
on different things.
Like sometimes, you
really need to step back
and think globally, am
I even in like the right
sort of minima to be
chasing down for a solution?
Like there's a lot of problems in which
sort of fast iteration
cycle is the predictor
of how successful you will be.
As a good example, like in
RL simulation, for example,
the more frequently you get reward,
the faster you can progress.
It's just an easier learning prompt,
the more frequently you get feedback.
But UX is not that way.
I mean, users are
actually quite often wrong
about what the right solution is,
and it requires a deep understanding
of the technical system
and what's possible,
combined with what the problem
is you're trying to solve.
Not just how the user expressed it,
but what the true underlying problem is
to actually get to the right place.
- Yeah, that's the old like stories
of Steve Jobs like rolling in there, like,
yeah, the user is a useful signal,
but it's not a perfect signal.
And sometimes, you have to
remove the floppy disk drive
or whatever the, I forgot
all the crazy stories
of Steve Jobs like making
wild design decisions.
But there, some of it is aesthetic,
that some of it is about the
love you put into the design,
which is very much a Steve
Jobs-Jony Ive type of thing.
But when you have a human
being using their brain
to interact with it, it also
is deeply about function.
It's not just aesthetic.
And that you have to empathize
with a human being before you,
while not always listening
to them directly.
Like you have to deeply empathize.
It's fascinating.
It's really, really fascinating.
And at the same time, iterate.
But not iterate in small ways.
Sometimes, a complete like
rebuilding the design.
He said that,
Noland said in the early
days, the UX sucked.
But you improved quickly.
What was that journey like?
- Yeah, I mean, I'll give
one concrete example.
So he really wanted to
be able to read manga.
This is something that he, I mean,
it sounds like a simple thing,
but it's actually a
really big deal for him.
And he couldn't do it
with his mouth stick.
It wasn't accessible.
You can't scroll with a
mouse stick on his iPad
on the website that he
wanted to be able to use
to read the newest manga.
- Might be a good quick pause
to say the mouth stick
is the thing he's using,
holding a stick in his
mouth to scroll on a tablet.
- Right, yeah, it's basically,
you can imagine it's a stylus
that you hold between your teeth.
Yeah, it's basically a very long stylus.
- And it's exhausting,
it hurts, and it's inefficient.
- Yeah, and maybe it's
also worth calling out,
there are other alternative
assisted technologies,
but the particular situation Noland's in,
and this is not uncommon,
and I think it's also not
well understood by folks,
is that he's relatively spastic
so he'll have muscle
spasms from time to time.
And so any assistive
technology that requires him
to be positioned directly
in front of a camera,
for example, an eye tracker,
or anything that requires him
to put something in his mouth
just is a no go, 'cause he'll either
be shifted out of frame
when he has a spasm,
or if he has something in his mouth,
it'll stab him in the face
if he spasms too hard.
So these kind of
considerations are important
when thinking about what advantages
a BCI has in someone's life.
If it fits ergonomically into your life
in a way that you can use it independently
when your caretaker's not
there, wherever you want to,
either in the bed or in the chair,
depending on your comfort level
and your desire to have pressure sores,
all these factors matter a lot
in how good the solution
is in that user's life.
So one of these very
fun examples is scroll.
So again, manga is something
he wanted to be able to read,
and there's many ways
to do scroll with a BCI.
You can imagine like different
gestures, for example.
The user could do that,
would move the page.
But scroll is a very
fascinating control surface,
because it's a huge thing on
the screen in front of you.
So any sort of jitter in the model output,
any sort of error in the model output
causes like an earthquake on the screen.
Like you really don't
wanna have your manga page
you're trying to read be
shifted up and down a few pixels
just because your scroll decoder
is not completely accurate.
And so this was an example
where we had to figure out
how to formulate the problem in a way
that the errors of the system,
whenever they do occur,
and we'll do our best to minimize them,
whenever those errors do occur,
that it doesn't interrupt the qualia again
of the experience that the user is having.
It doesn't interrupt their
flow of reading their book.
And so what we ended up building
is this really brilliant feature.
This is teammate named Ruse,
who worked on this really brilliant work
called quick scroll.
And quick scroll basically
looks at the screen,
and it identifies where on
the screen are scroll bars.
And it does this by deeply
integrated with MacOs
to understand where are the
scroll bars actively present
on the screen using the
sort of accessibility tool
that's available to MacOs apps.
And we identified where
those scroll bars are
and we provided a BCI scroll bar.
And the BCI scroll bar looks
similar to a normal scroll bar
but it behaves very differently
in that once you sort of move over to it,
your cursor sort of morphs onto it.
It sort of attaches or latches onto it.
And then once you push up or down
in the same way that you'd
use a push to control
the normal cursor, it actually
moves the screen for you.
So it's basically like
remapping the velocity
to a scroll action.
And the reason that feels so
natural and intuitive is that,
when you move over to attach
to it, it feels like magnetic.
So you're like sort of stuck onto it.
And then it's one continuous action.
You don't have to like switch
your imagined movement.
You sort of snap onto it
and then you're good to go.
You just immediately can start pulling
the page down or pushing it up.
And even once you get that right,
there's so many little nuances
of how the scroll behavior works
to make it natural and intuitive.
So one example is momentum.
Like when you scroll a page
with your fingers on the screen,
you actually have some like flow.
Like it doesn't just stop
right when you lift your finger up.
The same is true with BCI scroll.
So we had to spend some time to figure out
what are the right nuances.
When you don't feel the screen
under your fingertip anymore,
what is the right sort of dynamic
or what's the right amount
of page give, if you will,
when you push it to make
it flow the right amount
for the user to have
a natural experience reading their book.
And there's a million, I mean,
I could tell you like there's
so many little minutia
of how exactly that scroll works
that we spent probably like
a month getting right to make
that feel extremely natural
and easy for the user to navigate.
- I mean, even to scroll on
a smartphone with your finger
feels extremely natural and pleasant.
And it probably takes
a extremely long time
to get that right.
And actually, the same
kind of visionary UX design
that we're talking about, don't
always listen to the users
but also listen to them, and
also have like visionary big,
like throw everything out,
think from first principles but also not.
Yeah, yeah, by the way,
it just makes me think
that scroll bars on the desktop
probably have stagnated
and never taken that like,
'cause the snap, same
as like snap the grid,
snap the scroll bar action
you're talking about
is something that could
potentially be extremely useful
in the desktop setting,
even just for users to just
improve the experience,
'cause the current scroll bar experience
in the desktop is horrible.
- Yeah, agreed.
- It's hard to find, hard to control.
There's not a momentum.
And the intention should be clear.
When I start moving towards a scroll bar,
there should be a snapping
to the scroll bar action.
But of course, maybe I'm
okay paying that cost,
but there's hundreds of millions of people
paying that cost nonstop.
But anyway, but in this case,
this is necessary because
there's an extra cost
paid by Noland for the jitteriness.
So you have to switch between
the scrolling and the reading.
There has to be a phase
shift between the two.
Like when you're scrolling,
you're scrolling.
- Right, right, so that is one drawback
of the current approach.
Maybe one other just
sort of case study here,
so again, UX is how it works,
and we think about that
holistically from like the,
even the feature detection level
of what we detect in the brain
to how we design the decoder,
what we choose to decode,
to then how it works
once it's being used by the user.
So another good example in
the sort of how it works
once they're actually using the decoder,
the output that's displayed on the screen
is not just what the decoder says.
It's also a function of
what's going on on the screen.
So we can understand, for example,
that when you're trying to close a tab,
that very small, stupid little
X that's extremely tiny,
which is hard to get precisely hit
if you're dealing with sort of a noisy
output of the decoder, we can understand
that that is a small little
X you might be trying to hit
and actually make it a
bigger target for you.
Similar to how when you're
typing on your phone,
if you are used to like the
iOS keyboard, for example,
it actually adapts the target size
of individual keys based on
an underlying language model.
So it'll actually
understand if I'm typing,
"Hey, I'm going to see L."
It'll make the E key bigger,
because in those Lex is the
person I'm gonna go see.
And so that kind of predictiveness
can make the experience
much more smooth even without
improvements to the underlying decoder
or feature detection part of the stack.
So we do that with a feature
called magnetic targets.
We actually indexed the
screen and we understand,
okay, these are the places
that are very small targets
that might be difficult to hit.
Here's the kind of cursor
dynamics around that location
that might be indicative of
the user trying to select it.
Let's make it easier.
Let's blow up the size of it in a way
that makes it easier for the user
to sort of snap onto that target.
So all these little
details, they matter a lot
in helping the user be independent
in their day-to-day living.
- So how much of the work on the decoder
is generalizable to P2, P3, P4, P5, PM?
How do you improve the decoder
in a way that's generalizable?
- Yeah, great question.
So the underlying signal
we're trying to decode
is gonna look very
different in P2 than in P1.
For example, channel
number 345 is gonna mean
something different in user
one than it will in user two,
just because that
electrode that corresponds
with channel 345 is gonna be
next to a different neuron
in user one versus user two.
But the approach is the methods,
the user experience of
how do you get the right
sort of behavioral pattern from the user
to associate with that neural signal,
we hope that will translate
over multiple generations of users.
And beyond that, it's very, very possible.
In fact, quite likely that we've overfit
to sort of Noland's user
experience desires and preferences.
And so what I hope to see is that
when we get second,
third, fourth participant,
that we find sort of what
the right wide minimums are
that cover all the cases,
that make it more intuitive for everyone.
And hopefully, there's a
crosspollination of things where,
"Oh, we didn't think
about that with this user,
because they can speak.
But with this user who
just can fundamentally
not speak at all, this user
experience is not optimal."
And that will actually,
those improvements that we make there
should hopefully translate then
to even people who can't speak
but don't feel comfortable doing so
because we're in a public setting,
like their doctor's office.
- So the actual mechanism
of open loop labeling
and then closed loop
labeling will be the same,
and hopefully, can generalize
across the different users
as they're doing the calibration step.
And the calibration step is pretty cool.
I mean, that in itself,
the interesting thing about Webgrid,
which is like closed loop, it's like fun.
I love it when there's like,
they used to be kind of
idea of human computation,
which is using actions a
human would want to do anyway
to get a lot of signal from.
- Yeah.
- And like Webgrid is that,
like a nice video game that also serves
as great calibration.
- It's so funny.
I've heard this reaction so many times.
Before sort of the first
user was implanted,
we had an internal perception
that the first user
would not find this fun.
And so we thought really quite
a bit actually about like,
should we build other games
that like are more
interesting for the user
so we can get this kind of data
and help facilitate research
for long duration and stuff like this?
Turns out that like people love this game.
- Yeah.
- I always loved it,
but I didn't know that that
was a shared perception.
- Yeah, and just in case
it's not clear, Webgrid is,
there's a grid of, let's
say 35 by 35 cells,
and one of them lights up blue
and you have to move your mouse
over that and click on it.
And if you miss it and it's red-
- [Bliss] I played this
game for so many hours.
So many hours.
- And what's your record, you said?
- I think I have the highest at Neuralink.
Right now, my record's 17 BPS.
- 17 BPS.
- Which is about,
if you imagine that 35 by 35 grid,
you're hitting about 100
trials per minute in.
So 100 correct selections
in that one minute window.
So you're averaging about,
between 500, 600
milliseconds per selection.
- So one of the reasons
that I think I struggle
with that game is I'm
such a keyboard person,
so everything is done with via keyboard.
If I can avoid touching
the mouse, it's great.
So how can you explain
your high performance?
- I have like a whole ritual I go through
when I play Webgrid.
So it's actually like a diet
plan associated with this.
Like it's a whole thing, so great.
- The first thing-
- You have to fast
for five days, have to
go up to the mountains.
- Actually, it kind of,
I mean, the fasting thing is important.
So this is like, you know-
- Focuses the mind, yeah?
- Yeah, it's true.
So what I do is actually,
I don't eat for a little bit beforehand.
And then I'll actually eat
like a ton of peanut butter
right before, and I get like-
- This is a real thing?
- This is a real thing, yeah.
And then it has to be
really late at night.
This is again a night owl
thing I think we share,
but it has to be like midnight,
2:00 AM kind of time window.
And I have a very specific
like physical position I'll sit in,
which is, I used to be, I
was homeschooled growing up
and so I did most of my
work like on the floor,
just like in my bedroom or whatever.
And so I have a very specific
situation on the floor.
On the floor, I sit and play,
and then you have to make sure
like there's not a lot
of weight on your elbow
when you're playing so
that you can move quickly.
And then I turn the gain of the cursor,
so the speed of the cursor way, way up.
So it's like small motions
that actually move the cursor.
- Are you moving with your wrist
or you're never moving on-
- I move my fingers.
So my wrist is almost completely still.
I'm just moving my fingers.
- Yeah.
You know those, just on a small tangent,
which I've been meaning to
go down this rabbit hole
of people that set the
world record in Tetris.
Those folks, they're playing,
there's a way to, did you see this?
- I see like the three, like
all the fingers are moving.
- Yeah, you could find a way to do it
where like it's using a loophole,
like a bug that you can do
some incredibly fast stuff.
So it's along that line but not quite.
But you do realize there'll
be like a few programmers
right now listening to this
cool fast and eat peanut butter
and be like-
- Yeah, please, please
trade my record.
I mean, the reason I did this, literally,
was just because I wanted
the bar to be high.
The team, like I wanted
the number that we aim for
should not be like the median performance.
It should be able to
beat all of us at least.
Like that should be the minimum bar.
- What do you think is possible,
like 20 scrapes?
- Yeah, I don't know
what the limits.
I mean, the limits you can calculate
just in terms of like screen refresh rate
and like cursor immediately
jumping to the next target.
But I mean, I'm sure
there's limits before that
with just sort of reaction time
and visual perception
and things like this.
I would guess it's in the
below 40 but above 20,
somewhere in there is probably the right
that I'd never be thinking about.
It also matters like how
difficult the task is.
You could imagine like
some people might be able
to do like 10,000 targets on the screen
and maybe they can do better that way.
There's some like task optimizations
you could do to try to boost
your performance as well.
- What do you think it takes for Noland
to be able to do above 8.5?
To keep increasing that number?
You said like every increase in the number
might require different-
- [Bliss] Yeah.
- Different improvements in the system.
- Yeah, I think the
nature of this work is,
I mean, the first answer
that's important to say is,
I don't know.
This is edge of the research.
So again, nobody's gotten
to that number before.
So what's next is gonna be a
heuristic guess from my part.
What we've seen historically
is that different
parts of the stack follow
next to different time points.
So when I first joined Neuralink,
like three years ago or so,
one of the major problems
was just the latency
of the Bluetooth connection.
It was just like the radial
device wasn't super good.
It was an early revision of the implant,
and it just like, no matter
how good your decoder was,
if your thing is updating
every 30 milliseconds
or 50 milliseconds, it's
just gonna be choppy.
And no matter how good you are,
that's gonna be frustrating
and lead to challenges.
So at that point, it was very
clear that the main challenge
is just get the data off the
device in a very reliable way,
such that you can enable the
next challenge to be tackled.
And then at some point, it was,
actually, the modeling challenge
of how do you just build a good mapping,
like the supervised learning problem
of you have a bunch of data
and you have a label
you're trying to predict,
just what is the right like
neuro decoder architecture
and hyper parameters to optimize that?
And that was a problem for a bit.
And once you solve that, it
became a different bottleneck.
I think the next bottleneck
after that was actually
just sort of software
stability and reliability.
If you have widely varying
sort of inference latency
in your system, or your app just lags out
every once in a while, it
decreases your ability to maintain
and get in a state of flow,
and it basically just disrupts
your control experience.
And so there's a variety
of different software bugs
and improvements we made
that basically increased
the performance of the system,
made it much more
reliable, much more stable,
and led to a state where we
could reliably collect data
to build better models with.
So that was a bottleneck for a while.
It's just sort of like
the software stack itself.
If I were to guess right now,
there's sort of two major directions
you could think about for
improving BPS further.
The first major direction is labeling.
So labeling is again this
fundamental challenge
of given a window of time where the user
is expressing some behavioral intent.
What are they really trying to do
at the granularity of every millisecond?
And that, again, is a task design problem.
It's a UX problem.
It's a machine learning problem.
It's a software problem.
Sort of touches all
those different domains.
The second thing you can think about
to improve BPS further is
either completely changing
the thing you're decoding
or just extending
the number of things that you're decoding.
So this is serving the direction
of functionality, okay?
So you can imagine giving more clicks.
For example, a left click, a
right click, a middle click.
Different actions like
click and drag, for example.
And that can improve the effective
bit rate of your communication prosthesis.
If you're trying to allow the
user to express themselves
through any given communication channel,
you can measure that with bits per second.
But what action measures
at the end of the day
is how effective are they at
navigating their computer.
And so from the perspective
of the downstream tasks
that you care about, functionality
and extending functionality is something
we're very interested in,
because not only can it improve
the sort of number of BPS,
but it can also improve the downstream
sort of independence that the user has
and the skill and efficiency
with which they can
operate their computer.
- Would the number of threads increasing
also potentially help?
- Yes, short answer is yes.
It's a bit nuanced how that curve
or how that manifests in the numbers.
So what you'll see is
that if you sort of plot
a curve of number of channels
that you're using for decode
versus either the offline metric
of how good you are at decoding,
or the online metric of
sort of, in practice,
how good is the user using this device,
you see roughly a log curve.
So as you move further
out in number of channels,
you get a corresponding sort
of logarithmic improvement
in control quality and
offline validation metrics.
The important nuance
here is that each channel
corresponds with a specific
represented intention in the brain.
So for example, if you have a channel 254,
it might correspond with
moving to the right.
Channel 256 might mean move to the left.
If you want to expand
the number of functions
you want to control,
you really want to have
a broader set of channels
that covers a broader set
of imagined movements.
You can think of it kinda
like Mr. Potato man actually.
Like if you had a bunch of different
imagined movements you could do,
how would you map those imagined movements
to input to a computer?
You can imagine handwriting
to output characters on the screen.
You can imagine just
typing with your fingers
and have that output text on the screen.
You can imagine different finger
modulations for different clicks.
You can imagine wiggling your big nose
or opening some menu or
wiggling your big toe
to have like command tab
occur or something like this.
So it's really,
the amount of different actions
you can take in the world
depends on how many channels you have
on the information
content that they carry.
- Right, so that's more
about the number of actions.
So actually, as you increase
the number of threads,
that's more about increasing
the number of actions
you're able to perform.
- One other nuance there
that is worth mentioning,
so again, our goal is really
to enable a user with process
to control their computer
as fast as I can.
So that's BPS.
With all the same functionality I have,
which is what we just talked about,
but then also as reliably as I can.
And that last point is very related
to channel account discussion.
So as you scale out number of channels,
the relative importance
of any particular feature
of your model input to the output control
of the user diminishes,
which means that if the sort
of neural non-stationary effect
is per channel, or if
the noise is independent,
such that more channels means,
on average, less output effect,
then your reliability of
your system will improve.
So one sort of core thesis
that at least I have
is that scaling channel
account should improve
the reliability system without any work
on the decoder itself.
- Can you linger on the reliability here?
So first of all, when you see
non-stationarity of the signal,
which aspect are you referring to?
- Yeah, so maybe let's talk briefly
what the actual underlying
signal looks like.
So again, I spoke very
briefly at the beginning
about how when you imagine
moving to the right
or imagine moving to the left,
neurons might fire more or less.
And their frequency
content of that signal,
at least in the motor cortex,
it's very correlated with
the output intention,
the behavioral task
that the user is doing.
You can imagine actually,
this is not obvious,
that rate coding, which is
the name of that phenomenon
is like the only way the brain
could represent information.
You can imagine many different ways
in which the brain could encode intention.
And there's actually evidence
like in bats, for example,
that there's temporal codes.
So timing codes of like exactly
when particular neurons fire
is the mechanism of
information representation.
But at least in the motor cortex,
there's a substantial evidence
that it's rate coding,
or at least one, like first order of fact
is that it's rate coding.
So then if the brain is
representing information
by changing the sort of
frequency of a neuron firing,
what really matters is sort of the delta
between sort of the
baseline state of the neuron
and what it looks like
when it's modulated.
And what we've observed and
what has also been observed
in academic work is
that that baseline rate,
sort of the, if you're
to target the scale,
if you imagine that
analogy for like measuring
flour or something when you're baking,
that baseline state of
how much the pot weighs
is actually different day to day.
And so if what you're trying to measure
is how much rice is in the pot,
you're gonna get a different
measurement different days,
because you're measuring
with different pots.
So that baseline rate shifting
is really the thing that,
at least from a first order
description of the problem,
is what's causing this downstream bias.
There can be other effects,
non-linear effects on top of that,
but at least, at a very first order
description of the problem,
that's what we observe day to day
is that the baseline firing
rate of any particular
neuron are observed on a
particular channel is changing.
- So can you just adjust to the baseline
to make it relative to
the baseline nonstop?
- Yeah, this is a great question.
So with monkeys, we have
found various ways to do this.
One example way to do this is you ask them
to do some behavioral task,
like play the game with a joystick,
you measure what's going on in the brain,
you compute some mean
of what's going on across
all the input features,
and you subtract it in the input
when you're doing your BCI session.
Works super well.
For whatever reason,
that doesn't work super well with Noland.
I actually don't know the full reason why,
but I can imagine several explanations.
One such explanation could
be that the context effect
difference between some open loop task
and some closed loop task
is much more significant
with Noland than it is with a monkey.
Maybe in this open loop task,
he's watching the Lex Fridman podcast
while he's doing the task,
or he's whistling and listening to music
and talking with his
friend and ask his mom
what's for dinner while
he's doing this task.
And so the exact sort
of difference in context
between those two states
may be much larger,
and thus lead to a bigger
sort of generalization gap
between the features
that you're normalizing
at sort of open loop time
and what you're trying to
use at close loop time.
- That's interesting.
Just on that point,
it's kind of incredible
to watch Noland be able
to do, to multitask,
to do multiple tasks at the same time,
to be able to move the
mouse courser effectively
while talking and while being nervous,
because he's talking in front of-
- Kicking my ass and chest too, yeah.
- Kicking your ass.
And talk trash while doing it.
So all at the same time.
And yes, if you are trying
to normalize to the baseline,
that might throw everything off.
Boy is that interesting.
- Maybe one comment on that too.
For folks that aren't familiar
with assisted technology,
I think there's a common belief
that, well, why can't you
just use an eye tracker
or something like this
for helping somebody
move a mouse on the screen?
And it's a really a fair question,
and one that I actually did
was not confident before Noland,
that this was gonna be a profoundly
transformative technology
for people like him.
And I'm very confident
now that it will be,
but the reasons are subtle.
It really has to do with ergonomically
how it fits into their life.
Even if you can just offer
the same level of control
as what they would have
with an eye tracker
or with a mouse stick,
but you don't need to have
that thing in your face.
You don't need to be
positioned a certain way.
You don't need your caretaker
to be around to set it up for you.
You can activate it when you want,
how you want, wherever you want.
That level of independence is
so game changing for people.
It means that they can text
a friend at night privately
without their mom needing
to be in the loop.
It means that they can like open up
and browse the internet at
2:00 AM when nobody's around
to set their iPad up for them.
This is like a profoundly
game changing thing
for folks in that situation.
And this is even before we
start talking about folks
that may not be able to communicate at all
or ask for help when they want to.
This can be potentially the only link
that they have to the outside world.
And yeah, that one doesn't
I think need explanation
of why that's so impactful.
- You mentioned neural decoder.
How much machine learning
is in the decoder?
How much magic, how much
science, how much art,
how difficult is it to
come up with a decoder
that figures out what these
sequence of spikes mean?
- Yeah, good question.
There's a couple different
ways to answer this.
So maybe I'll zoom out briefly first,
and then I'll go down
one of the rabbit holes.
So the zoomed out view is that
building the decoder is really the process
of building the dataset, plus
compiling it into the weights.
And each of those steps is important.
The direction I think
of further improvement
is primarily going to
be in the dataset side
of how do you construct the
optimal labels for the model.
But there's an entirely separate challenge
of then how do you compile the best model.
And so I'll go briefly
down the second one,
down the second rabbit hole.
One of the main challenges with designing
the optimal model for BCI
is that offline metrics
don't necessarily correspond
to online metrics.
It's fundamentally a control problem.
The user is trying to control
something on the screen,
and the exact sort of user
experience of how you output
the intention impacts
their ability to control.
So for example, if you just
look at validation loss,
as predicted by your model,
there can be multiple ways
to achieve the same validation loss.
Not all of them are equally
controllable by the end user.
And it might be as simple as saying,
"Oh, you could just add
auxiliary loss terms
that like help you capture the
thing that actually matters."
But this is a very
complex nuanced process.
So how you turn the labels into the model
is more of a nuanced process
than just like a standard
supervised learning problem.
One very fascinating anecdote here,
we've tried many different
sort of neural network
architectures that translate brain data
to velocity outputs, for example.
And one example that's stuck in my brain
from a couple years ago
now is, at one point,
we were using just
fully connected networks
to decode the brain activity.
We tried A/B test where we were measuring
the relative performance
in online control sessions
of sort of 1D convolution
over the input signal.
So if you imagine per channel,
you have a sliding window
that's producing some Commvault feature
for each of those input sequences
for every single channel simultaneously.
You can actually get
better validation metrics,
meaning you're fitting the data better,
and it's generalizing
better on offline data
if you use this
convolutional architecture.
You're reducing parameters.
It's sort of a standard procedure
when you're dealing with time series data.
Now it turns out that when
using that model online,
the controllability was worse,
was far worse, even though the
offline metrics were better.
And there can be many
ways to interpret that,
but what that taught me at least was that,
hey, it's at least the case right now
that if you were to just throw
a bunch of computer at this problem,
and you were trying to sort
of hyper parameter optimize,
or let some GPT model hard code
or come up with or invent
many different solutions,
if you were just optimizing for loss,
it would not be sufficient,
which means that there's still
some inherent modeling gap here.
There's still some artistry
left to be uncovered here
of how to get your model
to scale with more compute.
And that may be fundamentally
labeling problem,
but there may be other
components to this as well.
- Is it data constrained at this time?
Which is what it sounds like.
How do you get a lot of good labels?
- Yeah, I think it's
data quality constrained,
not necessarily data quantity constrained.
- But even like even just a quantity.
I mean, 'cause it has to be
trained on the interactions.
I guess there's not
that many interactions.
- Yeah, so it depends
what version of this you're talking about.
So if you're talking about like,
let's say the simplest
example of just 2D velocity,
then I think, yeah, data
quality is the main thing.
If you're talking about how to build
a sort of multifunction output
that lets you do all the inputs,
the computer that you and I can do,
then it's actually a much more
sophisticated nuanced modeling challenge,
because now you need to think about
not just when the user's left clicking,
but when you're building
the left click model,
you also need to be thinking about
how to make sure it doesn't fire
when they're trying to right click
or when they're trying to move the mouse.
So one example of an interesting bug
from like sort of week one
of a BCI with Nolan was,
when he moved the mouse,
the click signal sort
of dropped off a cliff,
and when he stopped, the
click signal went up.
So again, there's a contamination
between the two inputs.
Another good example was, at
one point, he was trying to do
sort of a left click and drag.
And the minute he started moving,
the left click signal dropped off a cliff.
So again, 'cause there's
some contamination
between the two signals, you
need to come up with some way
to either in the dataset or in the model,
build robustness against this kind of,
you think of it like
overfitting, but really,
it's just that the model has not seen
this kind of variability before.
So you need to find some way
to help the model with that.
- This is super cool because it feels like
all of this is very
solvable, but it's hard.
- Yes, it is fundamentally
an engineering challenge.
This is important to emphasize,
and it's also important to emphasize
that it may not need
fundamentally new techniques,
which means that people
who work on, let's say,
unsupervised speech classification
using CTC loss, for example,
with internal to Siri,
they could potentially have
very applicable skills to this.
- So what things are you excited about
in the future development
of the software stack on Neuralink?
So everything we've been talking about,
the decoding, the UX-
- I think there's some I'm excited about,
like something I'm excited
about from the technology side,
and some I'm excited
about for understanding
how this technology is
going to be best situated
for entering the world.
So I'll work backwards.
On the technology entering
the world side of things,
I'm really excited to
understand how this device works
for folks that cannot speak at all.
They have no ability to
sort of bootstrap themselves
into useful control by
voice command, for example,
and are extremely limited in
their current capabilities.
I think that will be an
incredibly useful signal for us
to understand, I mean, really
what is an existential threat
for all startups, which
is product market fit.
Does this device have the capacity
and potential to transform people's lives
in the current state?
And if not, what are the gaps?
And if there are gaps,
how do we solve them most efficiently?
So that's what I'm very
excited about for the next
sort of year or so of
clinical trial operations.
The technology side,
I'm quite excited about
basically everything we're doing.
I think it's gonna be awesome.
The most prominent one, I would say,
is scaling channel count.
So right now, we have a
thousand channel device.
The next version, we'll have
between 3 and 6,000 channels.
And I would expect that curve
to continue in the future.
And it's unclear what set of problems
will just disappear
completely at that scale,
and what set of problems will remain
and require for their focus.
And so I'm excited about
the clarity of gradient
that that gives us in terms
of the user experiences
we choose to focus our
time and resources on.
And also in terms of the, yeah,
even things as simple as not stationary.
Like does that problem just completely
go away at that scale,
or do we need to come
up with new creative UXs
still even at that point?
And also, when we get to that time point,
when we start expanding out dramatically
the set of functions that you
can output from one brain,
how to deal with all the nuances
of both the user experience
of not being able to
feel the different keys
under your fingertips, but
still needing to be able
to modulate all of them in synchrony
to achieve the thing you want.
And again, you don't have that appropriate
set to feedback loop,
so how can you make that
intuitive for a user to control
a high dimensional control surface
without feeling the thing physically?
I think that's gonna be a
super interesting problem.
I'm also quite excited to understand,
do these scaling laws continue?
Like as you scale channel count,
how much further out do you go
before that saturation point is truly hit?
And it's not obvious today.
I think we only know
what's in the sort of interpolation space.
We only know what's
between zero and 1,024.
We don't know what's beyond that.
And then there's a whole sort of like
range of interesting sort of neuroscience
and brain questions, which
is when you stick more stuff
in the brain, in more places,
you get to learn much more quickly about
what those brain regions represent.
And so I'm excited about that fundamental
neuroscience learning,
which is also important
for figuring out how,
and to most efficiently,
insert electrodes in the future.
So yeah, I think all those dimensions,
I'm really, really excited about.
And that doesn't even
get close to touching
the sort of software stack that
we work on every single day
and what we're working on right now.
- Yeah, it seems
virtually impossible to me
that a thousand electrodes
is where it saturates.
It feels like this would be one of those
silly notions in the
future, where obviously,
you should have millions of electrodes,
and this is where like the
true breakthroughs happen.
- Yeah.
- You tweeted-
- Oh.
- "Some thoughts are most
precisely described in poetry."
Why do you think that is?
- I think it's because
the information bottleneck
of language is pretty steep.
And yet you're able to reconstruct
in the other person's
brain more effectively
without being literal.
If you can express a sentiment
such that in their brain,
they can reconstruct the
actual true underlying
meaning and beauty of the thing
that you're trying to get across.
The sort of the generator function
in their brain's more powerful
than what language can express.
And so the mechanism of
poetry is really just
to feed or seed that generator function.
- So being literal sometimes
is a suboptimal compression
for the thing you're trying to convey.
- And it's actually in
the process of the user
going through that generation
that they understand what you mean.
That's the beautiful part.
It's also like when you look
at a beautiful painting,
like it's not the pixels of the
painting that are beautiful,
it's the thought process that
occurs when you see that,
the experience of that.
That actually is a thing that matters.
- Yeah, it's resonating with some deep-
- [Bliss] Yeah.
- Thing within you that
the artist also experienced
and was able to convey
that through the pixels.
And that's actually gonna be
relevant for full on telepathy.
It's like if you just read
the poetry, literally,
that doesn't say much
of anything interesting.
It requires a human to interpret it.
So it's the combination of the human mind
and all the experiences
that human being has
within the context of the
collective intelligence
of the human species that
makes that poem make sense.
And they load that in.
And so in that same way,
the signal that carries
from human to human
meaning may seem trivial,
but may actually carry a lot of power
because of the complexity
of the human mind on the receiving end.
Yeah, that's interesting.
Poetry still doesn't, who is it?
I think Yoshi Bako first said
something about all the people that think
we've achieved AGI explain
why humans like music.
- [Bliss] Oh yeah.
- And until the AGI likes music,
you haven't achieved AGI
or something like this.
- Do you not think
that's like some next
token entropy surprise
kind of thing going on there?
- I don't know.
- I don't know either.
I listen to a lot of classical music
and also read a lot of poetry.
And yeah, I do wonder if
like there is some element
of the next token surprise
factor going on there.
- Yeah, maybe.
- Because I mean,
like a lot of the tricks
in both poetry and music
are like basically, you have
some repeated structure.
And then you do like a twist.
It's like, okay, verse or
like clause one, two, three
is one thing, and then
clause four is like,
okay, now we're onto the next theme.
And they kind of play with
exactly when the surprise happens
and the expectation of the user.
And that's even true like,
through history as musicians evolve music,
they take like some nuanced structure
that people are familiar with
and they just tweak it a little bit.
Like they tweak it and
add a surprising element.
This is especially true in
classical music heritage.
But that's what I'm wondering,
like is it all just entropy-
- So breaking structure
or breaking symmetry
is something that humans seem to like.
Maybe as simple as that.
- Yeah, and I mean, great artists copy,
and they also, knowing
which rules to break
is the important part.
And that fundamentally, it must be about
the listener of the piece.
Like which rule is the right one to break,
it's about the user or the audience member
perceiving that as interesting.
- What do you think is the
meaning of human existence?
- There's a TV show I really
like called "The West Wing."
And in "The West Wing,"
there's a character.
He's the president of the United States
who's having a discussion about the Bible
with one of their colleagues.
And the colleague says something about,
"The Bible says X, Y, and Z."
And the President says, "Yeah,
but it also says A, B, C."
And the person says,
"Do you believe the Bible
to be literally true?"
And the President says,
"Yes, but I also think
that neither of us are smart
enough to understand it."
I think the analogy here
for the meaning of life
is that largely, we don't know
the right question to ask.
And so I think I'm very aligned with
sort of "The Hitchhiker's
Guide to the Galaxy" version
of this question, which is basically,
if we can ask the right questions,
it's much more likely we find
the meaning of human existence.
And so in the short term,
as a heuristic in the sort
of search policy space,
we should try to increase the diversity
of people asking such questions,
or generally of consciousness
and conscious beings
asking such questions.
So again, I think I'll take
the 'I don't know card' here,
but say I do think there are
meaningful things we can do
that improve the likelihood
of answering that question.
- It's interesting how
much value you assign
to the task of asking the right questions.
That's the main thing is not the answers,
it's the questions.
- This point by the way is driven home
in a very painful way when
you try to communicate
with someone who cannot speak,
because a lot of the time,
the last thing to go is
they have the ability
to somehow wiggle a lip or move something
that allows them to say yes or no.
And in that situation, it's very obvious
that what matters is, are you asking them
the right question to be
able to say yes or no to?
- Wow, that's powerful.
Well, Bliss, thank you
for everything you do,
and thank you for being you,
and thank you for talking today.
- Thank you.
- Thanks for listening
to this conversation with Bliss Chapman.
And now, dear friends,
here's Noland Arbaugh,
the first human being to
have a Neuralink device
implanted in his brain.
You had a diving accident in
2016 that left you paralyzed
with no feeling from the shoulders down.
How did that accident change your life?
- That's sort of a freak
thing that happened.
Imagine you're running into the ocean,
although this is a lake, but
you're running into the ocean
and you get to about waist high,
and then you kind of like dive in,
take the rest of the plunge
under the wave or something.
That's what I did.
And then I just never came back up.
Not sure what happened.
I did it running into the
water with a couple of guys.
And so my idea of what happened
is really just that I
took like a stray fist,
elbow, knee, foot, something
to the side of my head.
The left side of my head was sore
for about a month afterwards.
So must must've taken a pretty big knock.
And then they both came up, and I didn't.
And so I was face down
in the water for a while.
I was conscious.
And then eventually just realized
I couldn't hold my breath any longer.
And I keep saying, "Took a big drink."
People, I don't know if
they like that I say that.
It seems like I'm making light of it all,
but it's just kind of how I am.
And I don't know, like I'm a very relaxed
sort of stress-free person.
I rolled with the punches
for a lot of this.
I kind of took it in stride.
It's like, "All right,
well what can I do next?
How can I improve my
life even a little bit
on a day-to-day basis?"
At first, just trying
to find some way to heal
as much of my body as possible,
to try to get healed, to
try to get off a ventilator,
learn as much as I could
so I could somehow survive
once I left the hospital.
And then thank God I had
like my family around me.
If I didn't have my parents, my siblings,
then I would've never made it this far.
They've done so much for me,
more than like I can ever
thank them for, honestly.
And a lot of people don't have that.
A lot of people in my situation,
their families either aren't
capable of providing for them,
or honestly, just don't want to.
And so they get placed
somewhere in some sort of home.
So thankfully I had my family.
I have a great group of friends,
a great group of buddies from college
who have all rallied around me,
and we're all still incredibly close.
People always say, "If you're lucky,
you'll end up with one or
two friends from high school
that you keep throughout your life."
I have about 10 or 12 from high school
that have all stuck around,
and we still get together,
all of us twice a year.
We call it the spring
series and the fall series.
This last one we all did,
we dressed up like X-Men.
So I did a Professor Xavier,
and it was freaking awesome.
It was so good.
So yeah, I have such a great
support system around me.
And so being a quadriplegic
isn't that bad.
I get waited on all the time.
People bring me food and
drinks, and I get to sit around
and watch as much TV and
movies and anime as I want.
I get to read as much as I want.
I mean, it's great.
- It's beautiful to see that
you see the silver lining in all of this.
Just going back, do
you remember the moment
when you first realized you were paralyzed
from the neck down?
- Yeah, yep.
I was face down in the water
right when whatever something hit my head.
I tried to get up and I
realized I couldn't move
and it just sort of clicked.
I'm like, "All right, I'm paralyzed.
Can't move.
What do I do?
If I can't get up, I can't flip over,
can't do anything, then I'm
gonna drown eventually."
And I knew I couldn't
hold my breath forever,
so I just held my breath
and thought about it
for maybe 10, 15 seconds.
I've heard from other people
that like look on liquors,
I guess the two girls that
pulled me out of the water
were two of my best friends.
They're lifeguards.
And one of them said that
it looked like my body
was sort of shaking in the water,
like I was trying to flip over and stuff.
But I knew, I knew immediately.
And I just kind of,
I realized that that's
what my situation was
from here on out.
Maybe if I got to the hospital,
they'd be able to do something.
When I was in the hospital,
like right before surgery,
I was trying to calm
one of my friends down.
I had like brought her with
me from college to camp,
and she was just bawling
over me, and I was like,
"Hey, it's gonna be fine.
Like don't worry."
I was cracking some jokes
to try to lighten the mood.
The nurse had called
my mom, and I was like,
"Don't tell my mom.
She's just gonna be stressed out.
Call her after I'm out of surgery,"
'cause at least she'll
have some answers then,
like whether I live or not, really.
And I didn't want her to be stressed
through the whole thing.
But I knew.
And then when I first
woke up after surgery,
I was super drugged up.
They had me on fentanyl like
three ways, which was awesome.
I don't recommend it, but
I saw some crazy stuff
on that fentanyl, and it was still
the best I've ever felt on drugs.
Medication, sorry, on medication.
And I remember the first time
I saw my mom in the hospital.
I was just bawling.
I had like ventilator in,
like I couldn't talk or anything,
and I just started crying,
because it was more like seeing her.
I mean, the whole situation
obviously was pretty rough,
but it was just like seeing her face
for the first time was pretty hard.
But yeah, I never had like a moment of,
"Man, I'm paralyzed.
This sucks.
I don't wanna like be around anymore."
It was always just, "I hate
that I have to do this,
but like sitting here and
wallowing isn't gonna help."
- So immediate acceptance.
- [Noland] Yeah, yeah.
- Has there been low points along the way?
- Yeah, yeah, sure.
I mean, there are days
when I don't really feel
like doing anything.
Not so much anymore.
Like not for the last couple years,
I don't really feel that way.
I've more so just wanted to
try to do anything possible
to make my life better at this point.
But at the beginning, there
were some ups and downs.
There were some really
hard things to adjust to.
First off, just like
the first couple months,
the amount of pain I was
in was really, really hard.
I mean, I remember screaming
at the top of my lungs in the hospital,
because I thought my legs were on fire.
And obviously, I can't feel anything,
but it's all nerve pain.
And so that was a really hard night.
I asked them to give me as
much pain meds as possible.
They're like, "You've had
as much as you can have,
so just kind of deal with it.
Go to a happy place sort of thing."
So that was a pretty low point.
And then every now and again, it's hard,
like realizing things that
I wanted to do in my life
that I won't be able to do anymore.
I always wanted to be
a husband and father,
and I just don't think
that I could do it now
as a quadriplegic.
Maybe it's possible, but
I'm not sure I would ever
put someone I love through that,
like having to take care of me and stuff.
Not being able to go out and play sports.
I was a huge athlete growing
up, so that was pretty hard.
Little things too, when I
realized I can't do them anymore.
Like there's something really special
about being able to hold
a book and smell a book.
Like the feel, the texture, the smell,
like as you turn the
pages, like I just love it.
I can't do it anymore.
And it's little things like that.
The two-year mark was pretty rough.
Two years is when they say
you will get back basically
as much as you're ever gonna get back,
as far as movement and sensation goes.
And so for the first two years,
that was the only thing
on my mind was like
try as much as I can to move my fingers,
my hands, my feet, everything possible
to try to get sensation and movement back.
And then when the two-year mark hit,
so June 30th, 2018,
I was really sad that
that's kind of where I was.
And then just randomly here and there,
but I was never like depressed
for long periods of time.
Just it never seemed worthwhile to me.
- What gave you strength?
- My faith.
My faith in God was a big one.
My understanding that it
was all for a purpose.
And even if that purpose wasn't anything
involving Neuralink,
even if that purpose was,
there's a story in the Bible about Job,
and I think it's a really,
really popular story,
about how Job has all
of these terrible things
happen to him, and he praises God
throughout the whole situation.
I thought, and I think
a lot of people think
for most of their lives that they are Job,
that they're the ones going
through something terrible,
and they just need to praise
God through the whole thing
and everything will work out.
At some point after my accident,
I realized that I might not be Job,
that I might be one of his children
that gets killed or
kidnapped or taken from him.
And so it's about terrible
things that happen
to those around you who you love.
So maybe, in this case,
my mom would be Job,
and she has to get through
something extraordinarily hard
and I just need to try and make it
as best as possible for her,
because she's the one that's really
going through this massive trial.
And that gave me a lot of strength.
And obviously, my family.
My family and my friends,
they give me all the strength that I need
on a day-to-day basis.
So it makes things a lot easier
having that great
support system around me.
- From everything I've seen of you online,
your streams and the way you
are today, I really admire,
let's say, your unwavering
positive outlook on life.
Has that always been this way?
- Yeah, yeah.
I mean, I've just always thought
I could do anything I ever wanted to do.
There was never anything too big.
Like whatever I set my mind
to, I felt like I could do it.
I didn't wanna do a lot.
I wanted to like travel around
and be sort of like a gypsy
and like go work odd jobs.
I had this dream of
traveling around Europe
and being like, I don't know,
a shepherd in like Wales or Ireland.
And then going and being
a fisherman in Italy,
doing all these things for like a year.
Like it's such like cliche things,
but I just thought it would be so much fun
to go and travel and do different things.
And so I've always just seen
the best in people around me too.
And I've always tried
to be good to people.
And growing up with my mom too,
she's like the most positive
energetic person in the world.
And we're all just people people.
I just get along great with people.
I really enjoy meeting new people,
and so I just wanted to do everything.
This is just kind of just how I've been.
- It's just great to see that
cynicism didn't take over,
given everything you've been through.
- Yeah.
- Was that like a
deliberate choice you made
that you're not gonna
let this keep you down?
- Yeah, a bit.
Also, like it's just kind of how I am.
Like I said, I roll with
the punches with everything.
I always used to tell people,
like I don't stress about things much.
And whenever I'd see
people getting stressed,
I would just say, "It's not hard.
Just don't stress about it."
And that's all you need to do.
And they're like, "That's
not how that works."
I'm like, "It works for me.
Like just don't stress, and
everything will be fine.
Like everything will work out."
Obviously, not everything
always goes well,
and it's not like it all works out
for the best all the time,
but I just don't think stress has had
any place in my life since I was a kid.
- What was the experience like
of you being selected to
be the first human being
to have a Neuralink device
implanted in your brain?
Were you scared, excited?
- No, no, it was cool.
(Lex laughing)
Like I was never afraid of it.
I had to think through a lot.
Should I do this?
Like be the first person?
I could wait until number two or three
and get a better version of the Neuralink.
Like the first one might not work.
Maybe it's actually gonna kind of suck it.
It's gonna be the worst
version ever in a person.
So why would I do the first one?
Like I've already kind of been selected.
I could just tell them, like,
"Okay, find someone else,
and then I'll do number two or three."
Like I'm sure they would let me.
They're looking for a few people anyways.
But ultimately, I was like, I don't know,
there's something about being
the first one to do something.
It's pretty cool.
I always thought that if I had the chance
that I would like to do
something for the first time,
this seemed like a
pretty good opportunity,
and I was never scared.
I think my like faith
had a huge part in that.
I always felt like God was
preparing me for something.
I almost wish it wasn't this,
because I had many conversations with God
about not wanting to do any
of this as a quadriplegic.
I told him, "I'll go
out and talk to people.
I'll go out and travel the world
and talk to stadiums, thousands of people,
give my testimony, I'll do all of it,
but like heal me first.
Don't make me do all of this in a chair.
That sucks."
And I guess he won that argument.
I didn't really have much of a choice.
I always felt like there
was something going on.
And to see how, I guess,
easily I made it through
the interview process
and how quickly everything happened,
how the stars sort of
aligned with all of this,
it just told me like, as the
surgery was getting closer,
it just told me that it
was all meant to happen.
It was all meant to be.
And so I shouldn't be afraid
of anything that's to come.
And so I wasn't.
I kept telling myself like,
"You say that now, but as
soon as the surgery comes,
you're probably gonna be freaking out.
Like you're about to have brain surgery."
And brain surgery is a big
deal for a lot of people,
but it's a even bigger deal for me.
Like it's all I have left.
The amount of times I've been like,
"Thank you God that you
didn't take my brain
and my personality and
my ability to think,
my like love of learning,
like my character, everything,
like thank you so much.
Like as long as you left me that,
then I think I can get by."
And I was about to let
people go like root around,
and they're like, "Hey, we're gonna go
put some stuff in your brain.
Hopefully, it works out."
And so it was something
that gave me pause.
But like I said, how
smoothly everything went,
I never expected for a second
that anything would go wrong.
Plus, the more people I
met on the Barrow's side
and on the Neuralink side,
they're just the most
impressive people in the world.
Like I can't speak enough
to how much I trust
these people with my life
and how impressed I am with all of them.
And to see the excitement on their faces,
to like walk into a room
and roll into a room
and see all of these people looking at me,
like we're so excited.
Like we've been working so hard on this,
and it's finally happening.
It's super infectious,
and it just makes me wanna do it even more
and to help them achieve their dreams.
Like I don't know, it's so rewarding.
And I'm so happy for
all of them, honestly.
- What was the day of surgery like?
When did you wake up?
What'd you feel?
- Yeah.
- Minute by minute.
- Yeah.
- Were you freaking out?
- No, no.
I thought I was going to,
but as surgery approached
the night before,
the morning of, I was just excited.
Let's make this happen.
I think I said something like that
to Elon on the phone beforehand.
We were like FaceTiming,
and I was like, "Let's rock and roll."
And he's like, "Let's do it."
I don't know, I wasn't scared.
So we woke up.
I think we had to be at the
hospital at like 5:30 AM.
I think surgery was at like 7:00 AM.
So we woke up pretty early.
I'm not sure much of us slept that night.
Got to the hospital 5:30,
went through like all the pre-op stuff.
Everyone was super nice.
Elon was supposed to be
there in the morning,
but something went wrong with his plane,
so we ended up FaceTiming.
That was cool.
Had one of the greatest
one-liners of my life.
After that phone call, hung up with him.
There were like 20 people
around me, and I was like,
I just hope he wasn't too
starstruck talking to me.
- Nice.
- Yeah, it was good.
- Well done.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Did you write that ahead of
time, or it just came to you?
- No, it just came to me.
I was like, "This seems right."
When in surgery,
I asked if I could pray right beforehand.
So I like prayed over the room.
I asked God if you would
like be with my mom
in case anything happened to me.
And just to like calm
her nerves out there.
Woke up and played a bit
of a prank on my mom.
I don't know if you've heard about it.
- Yeah, I read about it.
- Yeah, she was not happy.
- Can you take me through the prank
- Yeah, this is something-
- Do you regret
doing that now?
- No, no, not one bit.
It was something I had talked about
ahead of time with my buddy, Bain.
I was like, "I would really
like to play a prank on my mom."
Very specifically, my mom.
She's very gullible.
I think she had knee surgery once even.
And after she came out of knee surgery,
she was super groggy.
She's like, "I can't feel my legs."
And my dad looked at her, he was like,
"You don't have any legs.
Like they had to amputate both your legs."
We just do very mean
things to her all the time.
I'm so surprised that she still loves us.
But right after surgery,
I was really worried
that I was going to be too like
groggy, like not all there.
I had anesthesia once
before, and it messed me up.
Like I could not function
for a while afterwards.
And I like said a lot of
things that I was like,
I was really worried
that I was gonna start,
I don't know, like dropping some bombs.
And I wouldn't even know,
I wouldn't remember.
So I was like, "Please
God, don't let that happen.
And please let me be there
enough to do this to my mom."
And so she walked in after surgery.
It was like the first time
they had been able to
see me after surgery.
And she just looked at me, she said,
"Hi, like, how are you?
How are you doing?
How do you feel?"
And I looked at her in this very,
I think the anesthesia helped,
very like groggy, sort of
confused look on my face.
It's like, "Who are you?"
And she just started
looking around the room,
like at the surgeons,
at the doctors, like,
"What did you do to my son?
You need to fix this right now."
Tears started streaming.
I saw how much she was freaking out.
I was like, "I can't let this go on."
And so I was like, "Mom, I'm fine.
Like it's all right."
And still, she was not happy about it.
She still says she's
gonna get me back someday.
But I mean, I don't know.
I don't know what that's gonna look like.
- It's a lifelong battle.
- Yeah, it was good.
- In some sense, it was a demonstration
that you still got-
- That's all I wanted it to be
- Sense of humor.
- That's all I wanted it to be.
And I knew that doing
something super mean to her
like that would show her-
- -
- Yeah.
- To show that
you're still there, that you love her.
- [Noland] Yeah, exactly, exactly.
- It's a dark way to do it, but I love it.
What was the first time
you were able to feel
that you can use the Neuralink device
to effect the world around you?
- Yeah, the first little taste I got of it
was actually not too long after surgery.
Some of the Neuralink team had brought in
like a little iPad, a
little tablet screen,
and they had put up
eight different channels
that were recording some
of my neuron spikes.
They put it in front of me.
Like this is like real
time your brain firing.
That's super cool.
My first thought was, "I
mean, if they're firing now,
let's see if I can
affect them in some way."
So I started trying to
like wiggle my fingers
and I just started like
scanning through the channels,
and one of the things I was doing
was like moving my index
finger up and down.
And I just saw this yellow
spike on like top row,
like third box over or something.
I saw this yellow spike
every time I did it.
And I was like, "Oh, that's cool."
And everyone around me was just like,
"Well, what are you seeing?"
I was like, "Look, look at this one.
Look at like this top row, third
box over this yellow spike.
Like that's me right there, there, there."
And everyone was freaking out.
They started like clapping.
I was like, "That's super unnecessary."
- That's awesome.
- This is what's
supposed to happen, right?
- So you're imagining yourself moving
each individual finger one at a time,
and then seeing like that
you can notice something,
and then when you did the index
finger, you're like, "Oh."
- Yeah, I was wiggling
kind of all of my fingers
to see if anything would happen.
There was a lot of other things going on,
but that big yellow spike was
the one that stood out to me.
Like I'm sure that if I would've
stared at it long enough,
I could have mapped out
maybe 100 different things.
But the big yellow spike
was the one that I noticed.
- Maybe you could speak to what it's like
to sort of wiggle your fingers,
to imagine that the mental,
the cognitive effort required
to sort of wiggle your
index finger, for example.
How easy is that to do?
- Pretty easy for me.
It's something that,
at the very beginning,
after my accident, they told me to try
and move my body as much as possible.
Even if you can't, just keep trying,
because that's going to create
new like neural pathways
or pathways in my spinal cord
to like reconnect these things
to hopefully regain some movement someday.
- That's fascinating.
- Yeah, I know.
It's bizarre, but I-
- So that's part of the recovery process
is to keep trying to move your body?
- Yep, as much as you can.
- And that's,
and the nervous system does its thing.
It starts reconnecting.
- Yeah.
It'll start reconnecting for some people.
Some people, it never works.
Some people, they'll do it.
Like for me, I got some
bicep control back,
and that's about it.
I can, if I try enough,
I can wiggle some of my fingers.
Not like on command.
It's more like if I try to move,
say my right pinky and I
just keep trying to move it,
after a few seconds, it'll wiggle.
So I know there's stuff there.
Like I know, and that happens with a few
- -different of my fingers and stuff.
But yeah, that's what they tell you to do.
One of the people at the time
when I was in the hospital
came in and told me,
for one guy who had recovered
most of his control,
what he thought about every
day was actually walking,
like the act of walking
just over and over again.
So I tried that for years.
I tried just imagining
walking, which it's hard.
It's hard to imagine like all
of the steps that go into,
well, taking a step,
like all of the things that have to move,
like all of the activations
that have to happen
along your leg in order
for one step to occur.
- But you're not just imagining.
You're like doing it, right?
- I'm trying, yeah.
So it's like, it's imagining over again
what I had to do to take a step,
because it's not something
any of us think about.
You wanna walk and you take a step.
You don't think about all
of the different things
that are going on in your body.
So I had to recreate that in
my head as much as I could.
And then I practice it
over and over and over.
- So it's not like a
third person perspective.
It's a first person perspective.
You're like, it's not like
you're imagining yourself walking.
You're like literally
doing this, everything,
all the same stuff as if you're walking.
- Yeah, which was hard.
It was hard at the beginning.
- Like frustrating hard,
or like actually cognitively hard?
Like which way?
- It was both.
There's a scene in one of the
"Kill Bill" movies actually,
oddly enough, where she is like paralyzed,
I don't know, from like a
drug that was in her system.
And then she like finds some way to get
into the back of a truck or something,
and she stares at her
toe and she says, "Move."
Like move your big toe.
And after a few seconds
on screen, she does it.
And she did that with every
one of her like body parts
until she can move again.
I did that for years, just
stared at my body and said,
"Move your index finger.
Move your big toe."
Sometimes, vocalizing it like out loud,
sometimes just thinking it.
I tried every different way to do this
to try to get some movement back.
And it's hard because it
actually is like taxing,
like physically taxing on my body,
which is something I
would've never expected,
'cause it's not like I'm moving,
but it feels like there's
a buildup of, I don't know,
the only way I can describe
it is there are like signals
that aren't getting
through from my brain down,
'cause there's that gap in my spinal cord.
So brain down, and then from
my hand back up to the brain.
And so it feels like those signals
get stuck in whatever body
part that I'm trying to move.
And they just build up and build up
and build up until they burst.
And then once they burst, I
get like this really weird
sensation of everything
sort of like dissipating
back out to level, and then I do it again.
It's also just like a fatigue
thing, like a muscle fatigue,
but without actually moving your muscles.
It's very, very bizarre.
And then if you try to
stare at a body part
or think about a body part
and move for two, three,
four, sometimes eight hours,
it's very taxing on your mind.
It's takes a lot of focus.
It was a lot easier at the beginning
because I wasn't able to like control a TV
in my room or anything.
I wasn't able to control
any of my environment.
So for the first few years,
a lot of what I was doing
was staring at walls.
And so obviously, I did a lot of thinking,
and I tried to move a lot just
over and over and over again.
- So you never gave up sort of hope there?
- No.
- Just training hard
essentially?
- Yep, and I still do it.
I do it like subconsciously.
And I think that that helped a lot
with things with Neuralink, honestly.
It's something that I
talked about the other day
at the all hands that I did at
Neuralink's Austin facility.
- Welcome to Austin, by the way.
- Yeah, hey, thanks man.
I went to school-
- Nice hat.
- Hey, thanks, thanks man.
The gigafactory was super cool.
I went to school at Texas A&M,
so I've been around before.
- So you should be saying welcome to me.
- Yeah.
- Welcome to Texas, Lex.
Yeah, I get you.
- But yeah, I was talking about how
a lot of what they've had me do,
especially at the beginning,
well, I still do it now is body mapping.
So like there will be a
visualization of a hand
or an arm on the screen and
I have to do that motion,
and that's how they sort
of train the algorithm
to like understand what I'm trying to do.
And so it made things very
seamless for me, I think.
- That's really, really cool.
So yeah, it's amazing to know
'cause I've learned a lot about
the body mapping procedure
with the interface and
everything like that.
It's cool to know that
you've been essentially
like training to be like
world class at that task.
- Yeah, yeah.
I don't know if other quadriplegics,
like other paralyzed people give up.
I hope they don't.
I hope they keep trying,
because I've heard other
paralyzed people say,
like don't ever stop.
They tell you two years,
but you just never know.
The human body is capable
of amazing things.
So I've heard other people
say, "Don't give up."
Like I think one girl had spoken to me
through some family members
and said that she had been
paralyzed for 18 years,
and she'd been trying to
like wiggle her index finger
for all that time, and
she finally got it back
like 18 years later.
So like I know that it's possible,
and I'll never give up doing it.
I do it when I'm lying down.
Like watching TV, I'll
find myself doing it,
kind of just almost like on its own.
It's just something I've
gotten so used to doing
that I don't know, I don't
think I'll ever stop.
- That's really awesome to hear,
'cause I think it's one of those things
that can really pay off, in the long term.
'Cause like that is training.
You're not visibly seeing the results
of that training at the moment, but like,
there's that like Olympic
level nervous system
getting ready for something.
- Which honestly
was like something that
I think Neuralink gave me
that I can't thank them enough for it.
Like I can't show my
appreciation for it enough
was being able to visually see
that what I'm doing is
actually having some effect.
It's a huge part of the reason why,
like I know now that I'm
gonna keep doing it forever,
because before Neuralink,
I was doing it every day,
and I was just assuming
that things were happening.
Like it's not like I knew.
I wasn't getting back any
mobility or sensation or anything.
So I could have been running up
against a brick wall for all I knew.
And with Neuralink, I get to see
like all the signals happen in real time,
and I get to see that
what I'm doing can actually be mapped.
When we started doing like
click calibrations and stuff,
when I go to click my index
finger for a left click,
that it actually recognizes that.
Like it changed how I
think about what's possible
with like retraining my body to move.
And so yeah, I'll never give up now.
- And also, just the signal
that there's still a powerhouse
of a brain there that's like-
- Exactly.
- And as the technology
develops, that brain is,
I mean, that's the most important thing
about the human body is the brain.
And it can do a lot of the control.
So what did it feel like when you first,
could wiggle the index finger
and saw the environment respond?
Like that little-
- Yeah.
- Wherever, just being way
too dramatic according to you.
- Yeah, it was very cool.
I mean, it was cool, but I
keep telling this to people,
it made sense to me.
Like it made sense that
like there are signals
still happening in my brain,
and that as long as you
had something near it
that could measure those,
that could record those,
then you should be able to
visualize it in some way.
Like see it happen.
And so that was not very surprising to me.
I was just like, "Oh, cool."
We found one.
Like we found something that works.
It was cool to see that
their technology worked,
and that everything that
they had worked so hard for
was like going to pay off.
But I hadn't like moved a cursor
or anything at that point.
I had like interacted with a computer
or anything at that point.
So it just made sense, it was cool.
I didn't really know much
about BCI at that point either,
so I didn't know like what sort of step
this was actually making.
Like I didn't know if
this was like a huge deal,
or if this was just like,
okay, it's cool that we got this far,
but we're actually hoping
for something like much
better down the road.
It's like, okay.
I just thought that they
knew that it turned on.
So I was like, cool.
Like this is cool.
- Well, did you like read up on the specs
of the hardware you're getting installed?
Like the number of threads,
this kind of stuff?
- Yeah, I do all of that,
but it's all Greek to me.
I was like, okay, threads, 64 threads,
16 electrodes, 1,024 channels.
Okay.
Like that math checks out.
- Sounds right.
- Yeah.
- When was the first time
you were able to move a mouse cursor?
- I know it must have been
within the first maybe week,
a week or two weeks that I was able
to like first move the cursor.
And again, like it kind
of made sense to me.
It didn't seem like that big of a deal.
It was like, okay, well,
hmm, how do I explain this?
When everyone around you starts clapping
for something that you've
done, it's easy to say,
"Okay, like I did something cool.
Like that was impressive in some way."
What exactly that meant, what it was
hadn't really like set in for me.
So again, I knew that me
trying to move a body part
and then that being mapped
in some sort of like
machine learning algorithm
to be able to identify
like my brain signals and then take that
and give me cursor control,
that all kind of made sense to me.
I don't know like all
the ins and outs of it,
but I was like, there are still
signals in my brain firing.
They just can't get through
because there's like a
gap in my spinal cord.
And so they can't get all
the way down and back up,
but they're still there.
So when I moved the cursor for
the first time, I was like,
"That's cool, but I expected
that that should happen."
Like it made sense to me.
When I moved the cursor for the first time
with just my mind, without
like physically trying to move,
so I guess I can get into
that just a little bit.
Like the difference between
attempted movement and imagined movement.
- Yeah, that's a fascinating difference.
- Yeah.
- From one to the other.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So like attempted movement
is me physically trying
to attempt to move, say, my hand.
I try to attempt to move
my hand to the right,
to the left, forward and back.
And that's all attempted.
Attempt to like lift
my finger up and down.
Attempt to kick or something.
I'm physically trying to
do all of those things,
even if you can't see it.
This would be like me attempting
to like shrug my shoulders or something.
That's all attempted movement.
That's what I was doing for
the first couple of weeks
when they were going to
give me cursor control.
When I was doing body mapping,
it was attempt to do
this, attempt to do that.
When Nir was telling me
to like imagine doing it,
it like kind of made sense to me,
but it's not something
that people practice.
Like if you started school
as a child and they said,
"Okay, write your name with this pencil."
And so you do that.
"Okay, now imagine writing
your name with that pencil."
Kids would think like,
I guess like that kind of makes sense.
And they would do it.
But that's not something we're taught.
It's all like how to do things physically.
We think about like thought
experiments and things,
but that's not like a physical
action of doing things.
It's more like what you would
do in certain situations.
So imagined movement, it never
really connected with me.
Like I guess you could maybe describe it
as like a professional athlete,
like swinging a baseball bat
or swinging like a golf club.
Like imagine what you're supposed to do.
But then you go right to
that and physically do it,
then you get a bat in your hand
and then you do what
you've been imagining.
And so I don't have that like connection.
So telling me to imagine
something versus attempting it,
there wasn't a lot that I
could do there mentally.
I just kind of had to accept
what was going on and try.
But the attempted moving
thing, it all made sense to me.
Like if I try to move,
then there's a signal
being sent in my brain.
And as long as they can pick that up,
then they should be able to map
it to what I'm trying to do.
And so when I first moved
the cursor like that,
it was just like, "Yes,
this should happen."
Like I'm not surprised by that.
- But can you clarify, is there
supposed to be a difference
between imagined movement
and attempted movement?
- Yeah, just that in imagined movement,
you're not attempting to move at all.
- You're like visualizing doing.
And then theoretically, is
that supposed to be a different
part of the brain that lights up
in those two different situations?
- [Bliss] Yeah, not necessarily.
I think all these signals
can still be represented
in motor cortex, but the
difference I think has to do
with the naturalness
of imagining something
versus attempting it-
- Got it.
- [Bliss] And sort of the
fatigue of that over time.
- And by the way, on the mic is Bliss.
So this is just different
ways to prompt you
to kind of get to the
thing that you arrived at.
- [Noland] Yeah, yeah.
- Attempted movement does sound
like the right thing - try.
- Yeah, I mean, it makes sense to me.
- 'Cause imagine for me,
I would start visualizing,
like in my mind, visualizing.
Attempted, I would actually
start trying to like,
there's, I mean,
I did like combat sports my
whole life, like wrestling.
When I'm imagining a move,
see, I'm like moving my muscle.
- Exactly.
- Like there is a bit
of an activation almost,
versus like visualizing
yourself like a picture doing it.
- Yeah, it's something that
I feel like naturally, anyone would do.
If you try to tell someone
to imagine doing something,
they might close their eyes
and then start physically doing it.
But it's just-
- Just didn't click.
- Yeah.
It's hard.
It was very hard at the beginning.
- But attempted worked.
- Attempted worked.
It worked just like it should.
Worked like a charm.
- [Bliss] I remember
there was like one Tuesday
we were messing around, and I think,
I forget what swear word you used,
but there's a swear word
that came out of your mouth
when you figured out you could just do
the direct cursor control.
- Yeah, that's it.
It blew my mind.
Like no pun intended,
blew my mind when I first
moved the cursor just with my thoughts
and not attempting to move.
It's something that I've found
like over the couple of weeks,
like building up to that,
that as I get better cursor controls,
like the model gets better,
then it gets easier for me to like,
like I don't have to
attempt as much to move it.
And part of that is something
that I'd even talked
with them about when I
was watching the signals
of my brain one day, I was watching,
when I like attempted to move to the right
and I watched the screen,
it's like I saw the spikes.
It's like I was seeing the
spike, the signals being sent
before I was actually attempting to move.
I imagined just because when
you go to say move your hand
or any body part, that signal gets sent
before you're actually moving
has to make it all the
way down and back up
before you actually do
any sort of movement.
So there's a delay there.
And I noticed that there was
something going on in my brain
before I was actually attempting to move,
that my brain was like
anticipating what I wanted to do.
And that all started sort of,
I don't know, like
percolating in my brain.
It was just sort of there,
like always in the back.
Like that's so weird
that it could do that.
It kind of makes sense, but
I wonder what that means
as far as like using the Neuralink.
And then as I was playing around
with the attempted movement
and playing around with the cursor,
and I saw that like, as the
cursor control got better,
that it was anticipating my movements
and what I wanted it to do.
Like cursor movements,
what I wanted to do a bit
better and a bit better.
And then one day, I just randomly,
as I was playing Webgrid,
I like looked at a target
before I had started
like attempting to move.
I was just trying to like get over,
like train my eyes to start looking ahead.
Like, okay, this is the target I'm on,
but if I look over here to this target,
I know I can like maybe be
a bit quicker getting there.
And I looked over and the
cursor just shot over it.
It was wild.
I had to take a step back.
Like I was like, "This
should not be happening."
All day, I was just
smiling, I was so giddy.
I was like, "Guys, do
you know that this works?
Like I can just think it and it happens,"
which like they'd all been
saying this entire time.
like I can't believe
like you're doing all this with your mind.
I'm like, "Yeah, but is
it really with my mind?"
Like I'm attempting to move,
and it's just picking that up
so it doesn't feel like it's with my mind.
When I moved it for the
first time like that,
it was, oh man.
It made me think that this technology,
that what I'm doing is actually way,
way more impressive than I ever thought.
It was way cooler than I ever thought.
And it just opened up a whole
new world of possibilities
of like what could possibly
happen with this technology
and what I might be able
to be capable of with it.
- Because you had felt for the first time,
like this was digital telepathy.
Like you're controlling a
digital device with your mind.
- [Noland] Yep.
- I mean, that's a real
moment of discovery.
That's really cool.
Like you've discovered something.
I've seen like scientists talk
about like a big aha moment.
Like Nobel Prize winning,
they'll have this like holy crap.
- Yeah.
- Like whoa.
- That's what it felt.
I didn't feel like,
like I felt like I had
discovered something but for me.
Maybe not necessarily for
like the world at large
or like this field at large.
It just felt like an aha moment for me.
Like, "Oh this works."
Like obviously, it works.
And so that's what I do
like all the time now.
I kind of intermix the attempted movement
and imagined movement.
I do it all like together,
because I've found that there
is some interplay with it
that maximizes efficiency with the cursor.
So it's not all like one or the other.
It's not all just, I only use attempted
or I only use like imagined movements.
It's more I use them in parallel,
and I can do one or the other.
I can just completely think
about whatever I'm doing.
But I don't know.
I like to play around with it.
I also like to just
experiment with these things.
Like every now and again,
I'll get this idea in my head like,
"Hmm, I wonder if this works."
And I'll just start doing it,
and then afterwards, I'll tell them,
"By the way, I wasn't doing
that like you guys wanted me to.
I thought of something and I
wanted to try it and so I did.
It seems like it works,
so maybe we should like
explore that a little bit."
- So I think that discovery
is not just for you,
at least from my perspective,
that's the discovery
for everyone else who
ever uses a Neuralink
that this is possible.
Like I don't think this an obvious thing
that this is even possible.
It's like, I was saying to Bliss earlier,
it's like the four-minute mile.
People thought it was
impossible to run a mile
in four minutes, and once
the first person did it,
then everyone just started doing it.
So like just to show that it's possible,
that paves the way to
like anyone can not do it.
That's the thing that's actually possible.
You don't need to do
the attempted movement.
You can just go direct.
That's crazy.
- It is crazy, it's crazy.
- For people who don't know,
can you explain how the Link app works?
You have an amazing stream on the topic.
Your first stream, I think,
on X describing the app.
Can you just describe how it works?
- Yeah, so it's just an
app that Neuralink created
to help me interact with the computer.
So on the Link app, there
are a few different settings
and different modes and
things I can do on it.
So there's like the body mapping,
which we kind of touched on.
There's a calibration.
Calibration is how I
actually get cursor control.
So calibrating what's going on in my brain
to translate that into cursor control.
So it will pop out models.
What they use I think is like time.
So it would be five minutes,
and calibration will give
me so good of a model.
And then if I'm in it for
10 minutes and 15 minutes,
the models will progressively get better.
And so the longer I'm in it generally,
the better the models will get.
- That's really cool, 'cause
you often refer to the models.
The model's the thing that's constructed
once you go through the calibration step.
And then you also talked about,
sometimes you'll play like
a really difficult game,
like Snake, just to see
how good the model is.
- Yeah, yeah, so Snake is kind of like
my litmus test for models.
If I can control Snake decently well,
then I know I have a pretty good model.
So yeah, the Link app has all of those.
It has Webgrid in it now.
It's also how I like connect
to the computer just in general.
So they've given me a lot
of like voice controls
with it at this point,
so I can say like connect
or implant disconnect.
And as long as I have that charger handy,
then I can connect to it.
So the charger is also how
I connect to the Link app,
to connect to the computer.
I have to have the implant
charger over my head
when I wanna connect to have it wake up,
'cause the implant's in hibernation mode,
like always when I'm not using it.
I think there's a setting to
like wake it up every so long.
So we could set it to
half an hour or five hours
or something if I just want
it to wake up periodically.
So yeah, I'll like
connect to the Link app,
and then go through all sorts of things.
Calibration for the
day, maybe body mapping.
I made them give me like
a little homework tab,
because I am very forgetful
and I forget to do things a lot.
So I have like a lot of
data collection things
that they want me to do.
- Is the body mapping part
of the data collection,
or is that also part of the-
- Yeah, it is.
It's something that they
want me to do daily,
which I've been slacking on,
'cause I've been doing so much media
and traveling so much.
So I've been-
- You've been super famous.
- Yeah, I've been a
terrible first candidate
for how much I've been
slacking on my homework.
But yeah, it's just
something that they want me
to do every day to track
how well the Neuralink
is performing over time
and to have something to give.
I imagine to give to the FDA to create
all sorts of fancy charts
and stuff and show like,
"Hey, this is what the Neuralink,
this is how it's performing
day one versus day 90
versus day 180 and things like that.
- What's the calibration step like?
Is it like move left, move right?
- It's a bubble game.
So there will be like yellow bubbles
that pop up on the screen.
At first, it is open loop.
So open loop, this is something
that I still don't fully understand,
the open loop and closed loop thing.
- And me and Bliss talked for a long time
about the difference between
the two on the technical side.
- Okay.
- So it'd be great to hear
your side of the story.
- Open loop is basically,
I have no control over the cursor.
The cursor will be moving on
its own across the screen,
and I am following by intention
the cursor to different bubbles.
And then the algorithm is training off
of what like the signals it's
getting are as I'm doing this.
There are a couple different
ways that they've done it.
They call it center out target.
So there will be a bubble in the middle
and then eight bubbles around that.
And the cursor will go from
the middle to one side.
So say middle to left, back to middle,
to up, to middle, like up, right.
And they'll do that all
the way around the circle.
And I will follow that
cursor the whole time,
and then it will train
off of my intentions,
what it is expecting my intentions to be
throughout the whole process.
- Can you actually speak to,
when you say follow-
- Yes.
- You don't mean with your eyes.
You mean with your intentions.
- Yeah, so generally for calibration,
I'm doing attempted movements,
'cause I think it works better.
I think the better models,
as I progress through calibration,
make it easier to use imagined movements.
- Wait, wait, wait, wait.
So calibrated on attempted movement
will create a model that
makes it really effective
for you to then use the force?
- Yes, I've tried doing calibration
with imagined movement,
and it just doesn't work
as well for some reason.
So that was the center out targets.
There's also one where a random target
will pop up on the
screen and it's the same.
I just like move, I follow along
with wherever the cursor
is to that target,
all across the screen.
I've tried those with imagined movement,
and for some reason,
the models just don't,
they don't give as high level as quality
when we get into closed loop.
I haven't played around with it a ton,
so maybe like the different ways
that we're doing calibration
now might make it a bit better.
But what I've found is there
will be a point in calibration
where I can use imagined movement.
Before that point, it doesn't really work.
So if I do calibration for 45 minutes,
the first 15 minutes, I
can't use imagined movement.
It just like doesn't work for some reason.
And after a certain point,
I can just sort of feel it.
I can tell it moves different.
That's the best way I can describe it.
Like it's almost as if it is anticipating
what I am going to do
again before I go to do it.
And so using attempted
movement for 15 minutes,
at some point, I can kind of tell
when I like move my
eyes to the next target
that the cursor is
starting to like pick up.
Like it's starting to understand,
it's learning like what I'm going to do.
- So first of all, it's really cool that,
I mean, you are a true
pioneer in all of this.
You're like exploring how to do
every aspect of this most
effectively, and there's just,
I imagine so many lessons
learned from this.
So thank you for being a pioneer
in all these kinds of different
like super technical ways.
And it's also cool to hear
that there's like a different
like feeling to the experience
when it's calibrated in different ways,
'cause I mean, I imagine your brain
is doing something different,
and that's why there's a
different feeling to it.
And then trying to find the
words and the measurements
to those feelings would
be also interesting.
But at the end of the
day, you can also measure
that your actual performance
on whether it's Snake or Webgrid,
you could see like what
actually works well.
And you're saying, for
the open loop calibration,
the attempted movement works best for now.
- Yep, yep.
- So the open loop, you
don't get the feedback
that you did something.
- Yeah-
- Is that frustrating?
- No, no, it makes sense to me.
Like we've done it with a cursor
and without a cursor in open loop.
So sometimes, it's just,
say, for like the center out,
you'll start calibration
with a bubble lighting up,
and I push towards that bubble.
And then when that bubble,
when it's pushed towards
that bubble for say,
three seconds a bubble will pop
and then I come back to the middle.
So I'm doing it all just by my intentions.
Like that's what it's learning anyways.
So it makes sense that as long as I follow
what they want me to do, like
follow the yellow brick road,
that it'll all work out.
- You're full of great references.
Is the bubble game fun?
- Yeah, they always feel so
bad making me do calibration.
Like, "Oh, we're about to
do a 40-minute calibration."
I'm like, "All right, do you
guys wanna do two of them?"
Like I'm always asking to,
like whatever they need,
I'm more than happy to do.
And it's not bad.
Like I get to lie there or sit in my chair
and like do these things
with some great people.
I get to have great conversations.
I can give them feedback.
I can talk about all sorts of things.
I could throw something on
on my TV in the background
and kinda like split my
attention between them.
Like it's not bad at all.
I don't mind it.
- Is there a score
that you get?
Like can you do better on the bubble game?
- No, I would love that.
I would love-
- Yeah.
Writing down suggestions from Noland.
- That's-
- Make it more fun.
Gamified.
- Yeah, that's one thing
that I really, really enjoy about Webgrid
is 'cause I'm so competitive.
Like the higher the BPS,
the higher the score,
I know the better I'm doing.
I think I've asked at one
point one of the guys,
like if he could give me some
sort of numerical feedback
for calibration, like I would like to know
what they're looking at.
Like, "Oh, we see like this number
while you're doing calibration,
and that means, at least on our end,
that we think calibration is going well."
And I would love that,
because I would like to know
if what I'm doing is going well or not.
But then they've also told me like,
"Yeah, not necessarily like one-to-one."
It doesn't actually mean
that calibration is
going well in some ways.
So it's not like 100%,
and they don't wanna like
skew what I'm experiencing
or want me to change things based on that.
If that number isn't always accurate
to like how the model will turn out
or how like the end result,
that's at least what I got from it.
One thing I do that I have asked them
and something that I
really enjoy striving for
is towards the end of calibration,
there is like a time between targets.
And so I like to keep,
like at the end, that
number as low as possible.
So at the beginning,
it can be four or five,
six seconds between me popping bubbles.
But towards the end, I like
to keep it below like 1.5.
Or if I could, get it to like one second
between like bubbles, because in my mind,
that translates really nicely
to something like Webgrid
where I know if I can hit
a target one every second
that I'm doing real, real well.
- There you go, that's a way
to get a score on the calibrations.
Like the speed, how quickly can you get
from bubble to bubble.
- Yeah.
- So there's the open loop,
and then it goes to the closed loop.
- Closed loop.
- The closed loop
can already start giving you a sense,
'cause you're getting feedback
of like how good the model is.
- Yeah, so closed loop is when
I first get cursor control
and how they've described it to me,
someone who does not
understand this stuff,
I am the dumbest person in the room
every time I'm with-
- I love the humility.
- Yeah, is that I am closing the loop.
So I am actually now the
one that is like finishing
the loop of whatever this loop is.
I don't even know what the
loop is, they've never told me.
They just say there is a loop.
And at one point, it's
open and I can't control.
And then I get control and it's closed.
So I'm finishing the loop.
- So how long the
calibration usually take?
You said like 10, 15 minutes.
- Well, yeah, they're trying to get
that number down pretty low.
That's what we've been
working on a lot recently
is getting that down as low
as possible, so that way,
if this is something that people
need to do on a daily basis
or if some people need to do
on a like every other
day basis or once a week,
they don't want people to
be sitting in calibration
for long periods of time.
I think they've wanted to get it down
seven minutes or below, at
least where we're at right now.
It'd be nice if you never
had to do calibration.
So we'll get there at
some point, I'm sure,
the more we learn about the brain
and like I think that's the dream.
I think right now,
for me to get like really,
really good models,
I am in calibration 40 or 45 minutes.
And I don't mind.
Like I said, they always feel really bad,
but if it's gonna get me a model
that can like break
these records on Webgrid,
I'll stay in it for flipping two hours.
- Let's talk business.
So Webgrid.
I saw a presentation
where Bliss said by March,
you selected 89,000 targets in Webgrid.
Can you explain this game?
What is Webgrid, and what does it take
to be a world class performer in Webgrid,
as you continue to break world records?
- Yeah.
- It's like a gold medalist, like well.
- Yeah, I'd like to thank,
I'd like to thank everyone
who's helped me get here,
my coaches, my parents for
driving me to practice every day
at five in the morning.
Like to thank God.
And just overall, my
dedication to my craft.
- The interviews with athletes,
they're always like that,
it's like that template.
- Yeah.
- So Webgrid
is a grid that sells.
- Webgrid is, yeah.
It's literally just a grid.
They can make it as big or
small as you can make a grid.
A single box on that grid will light up
and you go and click it.
And it is a way for them to
benchmark how good a BCI is.
So it's pretty straightforward.
You just click targets.
- [Lex] Only one blue cell appears,
and you're supposed to move the mouse
to there and click on it.
- Yep.
So I like playing on like bigger grids,
'cause the bigger the
grid, the like more BPS.
It's bits per second that you
get every time you click one.
So I'll say, I'll play
on like a 35 by 35 grid,
and then one of those little squares cell,
we call it target, whatever,
will light up and you
move the cursor there
and you click it and
then you do that forever.
- And you've been able to achieve
at first eight bits per second.
And then you recently broke that.
- Yeah, I'm at 8.5 right now.
I would've beaten that literally
the day before I came to Austin.
But I had like, I don't know,
like a five second lag right at the end.
And I just had to wait until
the latency calmed down
and then I kept clicking.
But I was at like 8.01 and
then five seconds of lag,
and then the next like
three targets I clicked
all stayed at 8.01.
So if I would've been able to
click during that time of lag,
I probably would've hit, I
don't know, I might've hit nine.
So I'm there.
I'm really close.
And then this whole Austin trip
has really gotten in the way of my Webgrid
playing ability.
- It's frustrating.
- Yeah, it's-
- So that's all you've been
thinking about right now?
- Yeah, I know.
I want to do better at nine.
I want to do better.
I wanna hit nine, I think.
Well, I know nine is
very, very achievable.
I'm right there.
I think 10 I could hit
maybe in the next month.
Like I could do it probably
in the next few weeks if I really push it.
- I think you and Elon are
basically the same person,
'cause last time I did a podcast with him,
he came in extremely frustrated
that he can't beat Uber Lilith as a droid.
That was like a year ago I
think, I forget, like solo.
And I could just tell, there's
some percentage of his brain
the entire time was thinking like,
"I wish I was right now attempting."
- I think he did it.
- He did it that night.
- Yeah.
- He stayed up and did it that night.
It's just crazy to me.
I mean, in a fundamental
way, it's really inspiring.
And what you're doing is
inspiring in that way,
'cause I mean, it's not
just about the game.
Everything you're doing there has impact.
By striving to do well on Webgrid,
you're helping everybody figure out
how to create the system all along,
like the decoding, the
software, the hardware,
the calibration, all of it,
how to make all of that work
so you can do everything else really well.
- Yeah, it's just really fun.
- Well, that's also,
that's part of the thing
is like making it fun.
- Yeah, it's addicting.
I've joked about like
what they actually did
when they went in and put
this thing in my brain.
They must have flipped a switch
to make me more susceptible
to these kinds of games,
to make me addicted to
like Webgrid or something.
Do you know Bliss's high score?
- Yeah, he said like 14 or something.
- 17.
- Oh boy.
- 17.1 or something, 17.01.
- 17 dot, 17.01.
- Yeah.
- He told me he like does it on the floor
with peanut butter and he like fasts.
It's weird.
That sounds like cheating.
Sounds like performance enhancing.
- [Bliss] No, like the first
time Noland played this game,
he asked, "How good are we at this game?"
And I think you told me right then,
"You're gonna try to beat me on that."
- I'm gonna get there someday.
- Yeah.
I fully believe you.
- I think I can.
- I'm excited for that.
- Yeah.
So I've been playing, first
off, with the dwell cursor,
which really hampers my
Webgrid playing ability.
Basically, I have to wait
0.3 seconds for every click.
- Oh, so you can't do the clicks.
So you click by dwelling, you said 0.3?
- 0.3 seconds, which sucks.
It really slows down how much I'm able to,
like how high I'm able to get.
I still hit like 50, I think I hit like 50
something trials, net
trials per minute in that,
which was pretty good,
'cause I'm able to like,
there's one of the settings is also
like how slow you need to be moving
in order to initiate a
click, to start a click.
So I can tell sort of
when I'm on that threshold
to start initiating a
click just a bit early,
so I'm not fully stopped over
the target when I go to click.
I'm doing it like on my
way to the targets a little
to try to time it just right.
- Oh wow.
So you're slowing down.
- Yeah, just a hair
right before the targets.
(Lex laughing)
- This is like elite performance, okay.
But that's still,
it sucks that there's
a ceiling of the 0.3.
- Well, I can get down to 0.2 and 0.1.
Point one's what-
- I get it.
- Yeah, and I've played
with that a little bit too.
I have to adjust a ton
of different parameters
in order to play with 0.1,
and I don't have control
over all that on my end yet.
It also changes like how
the models are trained.
Like if I train a model like in Webgrid,
like I bootstrap on a model,
which basically is them
training models as I'm playing Webgrid
based off of like the Webgrid data,
so like if I play Webgrid for 10 minutes,
they can train off that data specifically
in order to get me a better model.
If I do that with 0.3 versus 0.1,
the models come out different.
The way that they interact
is just much, much different.
So I have to be really careful.
I found that doing it with 0.3
is actually better in some ways,
unless I can do it with 0.1
and change all of the
different parameters,
then that's more ideal,
'cause obviously, 0.3 is faster than 0.1.
So I could get there.
I can get there.
- Can you click using your brain?
- For right now, it's the hover clicking
with the dwell cursor.
Before all the thread
retraction stuff happened,
we were calibrating clicks
- left click, right click.
That was my previous ceiling.
Before I broke the record
again with the dwell cursor
was I think on a 35 by 35 grid
with left and right click.
And you get more BPS, more bits per second
using multiple clicks
'cause it's more difficult.
- Oh, because what is it,
you're supposed to do either a left click
or a like right click?
You use a different color
for stuff like this?
- Yeah, blue targets for left click;
orange targets for right
click is what they had done.
- Got it.
- So my previous record of 7.5
was with the blue and
the orange targets, yeah,
which I think if I went back to that now
doing the click calibration,
and being able to like
initiate clicks on my own,
I think I would would
break that 10 ceiling
like in a couple days max.
- Like yeah, you would
start making Bliss nervous
about his 17-
- You should be.
- Why do you think we
haven't given him the-
- Yeah, exactly.
So what did it feel like
with the retractions?
That some of the threads retracted?
- It sucked.
It was really, really hard.
The day they told me was the
day of my big Neuralink tour
at their Fremont
facility, and they told me
like right before we went over there.
It was really hard to hear.
My initial reaction was,
"Alright, go in, fix it.
Like go in, take it out, and fix it."
The first surgery was so easy.
Like I went to sleep.
A couple hours later, I
woke up and here we are.
I didn't feel any pain,
didn't take like any
pain pills or anything.
So I just knew that if they
wanted to, they could go in
and put in a new one like next
day if that's what it took,
'cause I wanted it to be better
and I wanted not to lose the capability.
I had so much fun playing with it
for a few weeks, for a month.
It had opened up so many doors for me.
It had opened up so
many more possibilities
that I didn't want to
lose it after a month.
I thought it would've
been a cruel twist of fate
if I had gotten to see the view
from like the top of this mountain
and then have it all come
crashing down after a month.
And I knew like, say,
the top of the mountain,
but how I saw it was I was just now
starting to climb the mountain.
There was so much more
that I knew was possible.
And so to have all of that be taken away
was really, really hard.
But then on the drive
over to the facility,
I don't know, like five
minute drive, whatever it is,
I talked with my parents about it.
I prayed about it.
I was just like, "I'm not
gonna let this ruin my day.
I'm not gonna let this
ruin this amazing like tour
that they have set up for me.
Like I wanna go show everyone
how much I appreciate all
the work they're doing.
I wanna go like meet all of the people
who have made this possible,
and I wanna go have one of
the best days of my life."
And I did, and it was amazing,
and it absolutely was one of the best days
I've ever been privileged to experience.
And then for a few days, I
was pretty down in the dumps.
But for like the first few days
afterwards, I was just like,
I didn't know if it was
gonna ever gonna work again.
I made the decision that
even if I lost the ability
to use the Neuralink, even if I lost,
even if I like lost out
on everything to come,
if I could keep giving
them data in any way,
then I would do that.
If I needed to just do
like some of the data collection every day
or body mapping every day for
a year, then I would do it,
because I know that everything I'm doing
helps everyone to come after me.
And that's all I wanted.
I guess the whole reason that
I did this was to help people,
and I knew that anything
I could do to help,
I would continue to do,
even if I never got to
use the cursor again,
then I was just happy to be a part of it.
And everything that I'd
done was just a perk.
It was something that I got to experience,
and I know how amazing it's gonna be
for everyone to come after me.
So might as well just keep trucking along.
- Well, that said, you were able to get
to work your way up, to
get the performance back.
So this is like going from
rocky one to rocky two.
So when did you first realize
that this is possible,
and what gave you sort of the strength
and motivation, determination to do it?
To increase back up and
beat your previous record?
- Yeah, it was within a couple weeks.
- Again, this feels like I'm interviewing
an athlete. (laughs)
This is great.
I like to thank my parents.
- The road back was long and hard,
fraught many difficulties.
There were dark days.
It was a couple weeks, I think.
And then there was just a turning point.
I think they had switched
how they were measuring
the neuron spikes in my brain.
Bliss, help me out.
- [Bliss] Yeah, the way
in which we're measuring
the behavior of individual neurons.
- Yeah.
- So we're switching from
sort of individual spike detection
to something called spike band power,
which if you watch the previous segments
with either me or DJ, you
probably have some content.
- Yeah, okay, so when they
did that, it was kind of like,
a light over the head,
like light bulb moment.
Like, "Oh, this works."
And this seems like we can run with this.
And I saw the uptick in
performance immediately.
Like I could feel it
when they switched over.
I was like, "This is better.
Like this is good."
Like everything up till this point
for the last few weeks,
last like whatever, three or four weeks,
'cause it was before they even told me,
like everything before this sucked.
Like let's keep doing
what we're doing now.
And at that point, it was not like,
"Oh, I know I'm still only at,
like saying Webgrid terms,
like four or five BPS
compared to my 7.5 before.
But I know that if we keep doing this,
then like I can get back there."
And then they gave me the dwell cursor,
and the dwell cursor sucked at first.
It's not, obviously, not what I want,
but it gave me a path forward
to be able to continue using it,
and hopefully, to continue to help out.
And so I just ran with
it, never looked back.
Like I said, I'm just kind of person
that roll with the punches anyways.
- What was the process?
What was the feedback
loop on the figuring out
how to do the spike detection
in a way that would actually
work well for Noland?
- Yeah, it's a great question.
So maybe just describe first
how the actual update worked.
It was basically an
update to your implant.
So we just did an over
the air software update
to his implants, same way
you'd update your Tesla
or your iPhone, and that
firmware change enabled us
to record sort of averages of populations
of neurons nearby individual electrodes.
So we have sort of less resolution
about which individual
neuron is doing what,
but we have a broader
picture of what's going on
nearby an electrode overall.
And that feedback, I mean, basically,
Noland described it was immediate
when we flipped that switch.
I think the first day we did that,
you had three or four
BPS right out of the box.
And that was a light bulb moment for,
"Okay, this is the right path to go down."
And from there, there's
a lot of feedback around
like how to make this
useful for independent use.
So what we care about ultimately is that
you can use it independently
to do whatever you want.
And to get to that point, it required us
to re-engineer the UX, as you
talked about the dwell cursor,
to make it something that
you can use independently
without us needing to be
involved all the time.
And yeah, this is obviously the
start of this journey still.
Hopefully, we get back to
the places where you're doing
multiple clicks and using that to control
much more fluidly, everything,
and much more naturally, the applications
that you're trying to interface with.
- And most importantly,
get that Webgrid number up.
- Yes.
- Yeah.
So how is the, on the hover click,
do you accidentally click cells sometimes?
Like how hard is it to
avoid accidentally clicking?
- I have to continuously
keep it moving, basically.
So like I said, there's a threshold
where it will initiate a click.
So if I ever drop below that, it'll start,
and I have 0.3 seconds to move
it before it clicks anything.
And if I don't want it to ever get there,
I just keep it moving at a certain speed,
and like just constantly
like doing circles on screen,
moving it back and forth to
keep it from clicking stuff.
I actually noticed a couple weeks back,
when I was not using the implant,
I was just moving my hand
back and forth or in circles.
Like I was trying to keep
the cursor from clicking,
and I was just doing it
like while I was trying
to go to sleep, and I was like,
"Okay, this is a problem."
(both laughing)
- To avoid the clicking.
I guess, does that create
problems like when you're gaming
accidentally click a thing?
- Yeah, yeah, it happens in chess.
I've lost a number of games
because I'll accidentally click something.
- [Bliss] I think the
first time I ever beat you
was because of an accident.
- Yeah, I misclicked, yeah.
- It's a nice excuse, right?
- Yeah.
- You can always,
anytime you lose-
- You could just say-
- That was accidental.
- Yeah.
- You said the app improved
a lot from version one.
When you first started using
it, it was very different.
So can you just talk
about the trial and error
that you went through with the team?
Like 200 plus pages of notes.
What's that process like of-
- Yeah.
- Going back and forth
and working together to improve the thing?
- It's a lot of me just using
it like day in and day out
and saying, like, "Hey, can
you guys do this for me?
Like give me this.
I wanna be able to do that.
I need this."
I think a lot of it just
doesn't occur to them maybe
until someone is actually using the app,
using the implant.
It's just something that
they just never would've thought of.
Or it's very specific to even like me,
maybe what I want.
It's something I'm a little worried about
with the next people that come
is maybe they will want
things much different
than how I've set it up,
or what the advice I've given the team.
And they're gonna look
at some of the things
they've added for me.
Like that's a dumb idea.
Like why would he ask for that?
And so I'm really looking
forward to get the next people on
because I guarantee that
they're going to think of things
that I've never thought of.
They're gonna think of improvements.
I'm like, "Wow, that's a really good idea.
Like I wish I would've thought of that."
And then they're also
gonna give me some pushback
about like, "Yeah, what you
are asking them to do here,
that's a bad idea.
Let's do it this way."
And I'm more than happy
to have that happen.
But it's just a lot of
like different interactions
with different games or applications,
the internet, just with
the computer in general.
There's tons of bugs
that end up popping up
left, right, center.
So it's just me trying to
use it as much as possible
and showing them what
works and what doesn't work
and what I would like to be better.
And then they take that feedback,
and they usually create
amazing things for me.
They solve these problems in
ways I would've never imagined.
They're so good at everything they do.
And so I'm just really thankful
that I'm able to give them feedback
and they can make something of it,
'cause a lot of my feedback
is like really dumb.
It's just like, "I want this.
Please do something about it."
And we'll come back and
super well thought out,
and it's way better than anything
I could have ever thought
of or implemented myself.
So they're just great.
They're really, really cool.
- As the BCI community grows,
would you like to hang out
with the other folks with Neuralink?
What relationship, if any,
would you wanna have with them?
Because you said like they
might have a different
set of like ideas of how to use the thing.
- Yeah.
- Would you be intimidated
by their Webgrid performance?
- No, no, I hope compete.
I hope day one, they like
wipe the floor with me.
I hope they beat it and they crush it.
Double it if they can.
Just because, on one hand,
it's only gonna push me to be better,
'cause I'm super competitive.
I want other people to push me.
I think that is important
for anyone trying to achieve
greatness is they need
other people around them
who are going to push them to be better.
And I even made a joke about it on X once.
Like once the next people get chosen,
like qubadi cot music, like
I'm just excited to have
other people to do this with
and to like share experiences with.
I'm more than happy to interact
with them as much as they want,
more than happy to give them advice.
I don't know what kind of
advice I could give them,
but if they have questions,
I'm more than happy.
- What advice would you have
for the next participant
in the clinical trial?
- That they should have fun with this,
because it is a lot of fun.
And that I hope they
work really, really hard,
because it's not just for us,
it's for everyone that comes after us.
And come to me if they need anything.
And to go to Neuralink
if they need anything.
Man, Neuralink moves mountains.
Like they do absolutely
anything for me that they can.
And it's an amazing
support system to have.
It puts my mind at ease
for like so many things
that I have had like questions about,
or so many things I wanna do.
And they're always there, and
that's really, really nice.
I would tell them not to be
afraid to go to Neuralink
with any questions that
they have, any concerns,
anything that they're
looking to do with this.
And any help that Neuralink
is capable of providing,
I know they will.
And I don't know, I don't know.
Just work your ass off,
because it's really important
that we try to give our all to this.
- So have fun and work hard.
- Yeah, yeah, there we go.
Maybe that's what I'll just
start saying to people:
have fun, work hard.
- Now, you're a real pro athlete.
Just keep it short.
(Noland laughing)
Maybe it's good to talk about
what you've been able to do
now that you have a Neuralink implant.
Like the freedom you gain
from this way of interacting
with the outside world.
Like you play video games all night.
And you do that by yourself.
And that's a kind of freedom.
Can you speak to that
freedom that you gain?
- Yeah, it's what all, I don't know,
people in my position want.
They just want more independence.
The more load that I can take away
from people around me, the better.
If I'm able to interact with the world
without using my family,
without going through any of my friends,
like needing them to help
me with things, the better.
If I'm able to sit up
on my computer all night
and not need someone to like sit me up,
say like on my iPad, like in
a position where I can use it
and then have to have them wait up for me
all night until I'm ready
to be done using it,
it takes a load off of all of us.
And it's really like all I can ask for.
It's something that
I could never thank Neuralink enough for.
And I know my family feels the same way.
Just being able to have the
freedom to do things on my own
at any hour of the day or
night, it means the world to me.
And I don't know.
- When you're up at 2:00 AM
playing Webgrid by yourself,
I just imagine like it's darkness
and there's just a light glowing.
And you're just focused.
What's going through your mind?
(Noland laughing)
Or you were like in a state of flow
where it's like the mind is empty,
like those like Zen masters?
- Yeah, generally, it is me
playing music of some sort.
I have a massive playlist,
and so I'm just like rocking out to music.
And then it's also just
like a race against time,
'cause I'm constantly looking at
how much battery percentage
I have left on my implant.
Like, all right, I have 30%,
which equates to x amount of time,
which means I have to break this record
in the next hour and a half,
or else, it's not happening tonight.
And so it's a little
stressful when that happens.
When it's above 50%, I'm
like, "Okay, like I got time."
It starts getting down to 30 and then 20.
It's like, all right, 10%,
a little popup is gonna pop up right here,
and it's gonna really
screw my Webgrid flow.
It's gonna tell me that
there's like the low battery,
low battery popup comes up, and I'm like,
it's really gonna screw me over.
So if I have to, if I'm
gonna break this record,
I have to do it in the
next like 30 seconds,
or else, that popup is
gonna get in the way,
like cover my Webgrid.
After that, I go click on
it, go back into Webgrid.
And I'm like, "All
right, that means I have
10 minutes left before this thing's dead."
That's what's going on
in my head generally,
that and whatever song's playing.
I want to break those records so bad.
Like it's all I want
when I'm playing Webgrid.
It has become less of like,
"Oh, this is just a leisurely activity."
Like I just enjoy doing this,
because it just feels so
nice and it puts me at ease.
No, once I'm in Webgrid,
you better break this record
or you're gonna waste like five hours
of your life right now.
And I don't know, it's just fun.
It's fun, man.
- Have you ever tried Webgrid
with like two targets and three targets?
Can you get higher BPS with that?
- Can you do that?
- [Bliss] You mean, like
different color targets,
or you mean-
- Oh, multiple targets,
'cause that change the thing.
- Yeah, so BPS is a log
of number of targets
times correct minus
incorrect divided by time.
And so you can think of
like different clicks
as basically doubling the
number of active targets.
- Got it.
- So you know,
you get basically higher BPS,
the more options there are,
the more difficult to task.
And there's also like zen
mode you've played in before,
which is like-
- Yeah.
Yeah, it covers the
whole screen with a grid.
And I don't know.
- [Lex] Yeah, and so you can go like,
that's insane.
- Yeah.
- [Bliss] He doesn't like it
'cause it didn't show BPS.
- I had them put in a giant
BPS in the background,
so now it's like the opposite of Zen mode.
It's like super hard mode,
like just metal mode.
It's just like a giant
number in the back counter.
- [Bliss] We should rename that.
Metal mode is a much better name now.
- So you also play Civilization VI?
- I love Civ VI, yeah.
- [Lex] You usually go with Korea,
you said?
- I do, yeah.
So the great part about
Korea is they focus on
like science tech victories,
which was not planned.
Like I've been playing Korea for years,
and then all of the
Neuralink stuff happened.
So it kind of aligned.
But what I've noticed with tech victories
is if you can just rush
tech, rush science,
then you can do anything.
Like at one point in the game,
you'll be so far ahead of
everyone technologically
that you'll have like
musket men, infantry men,
plane sometimes, and people
will still be fighting
with like bows and arrows.
And so if you want to
win a domination victory,
you just get to a certain
point with the science
and then go and wipe out
the rest of the world.
Or you can just take science
all the way and win that way,
and you're gonna be so
far ahead of everyone
'cause you're producing so much science
that it's not even close.
I've accidentally won in different ways
just by focusing on science.
- Accidentally won by focusing on science.
- I was playing only science, obviously.
Like just science all the way, just tech.
And I was trying to get like every tech
in the tech tree and stuff.
And then I accidentally won
through a diplomatic victory,
and I was so mad.
(Lex laughing)
I was so mad,
'cause it just like ends the game.
One turn, it was like,
"Oh, you won, you're so diplomatic."
I'm like, "I don't wanna do this.
I should have declared war
on more people or something."
It was terrible, but you don't need
like giant civilizations with
tech, especially with Korea.
You can keep it pretty small.
So I generally just get
to a certain military unit
and put them all around my
border to keep everyone out,
and then I will just build up.
So very isolationist.
- Nice.
- Yeah.
- Just work on the science and the tech.
- [Noland] Yep, that's it.
- You're making it sound so fun.
- It's so much fun.
- And I also saw
Civilization VII trailer.
- Oh man, I'm so pumped.
- Yeah.
And that's probably coming out-
- Come on, Civ VII, hit me up.
Alpha, beta tests, whatever.
- Wait, when is it coming out?
- 2025.
- Yeah, yeah, next year, yeah.
What other stuff would
you like to see improved
about the Neuralink app and
just the entire experience?
- I would like to, like I said,
get back to the like click on demand,
like the regular clicks.
That would be great.
I would like to be able to
connect to more devices.
Right now, it's just the computer.
I'd like to be able to use it on my phone
or use it on different
consoles, different platforms.
I'd like to be able to control
as much stuff as possible, honestly.
Like an Optimus robot
would be pretty cool.
That would be sick if I could
control an Optimus robot.
The Link app itself, it
seems like we are getting
pretty dialed in to what it
might look like down the road.
Seems like we've gotten through
a lot of what I want from it at least.
The only other thing I would say
is like more control
over all the parameters
that I can tweak with my
like cursor and stuff.
There's a lot of things that go into
how the cursor moves in certain ways.
And I have, I don't
know, like three or four
of those parameters and there might-
- Like gain and friction and all that?
- Gain and friction, yeah.
And there's maybe double
the amount of those
with just like velocity
and then with the actual dwell cursor.
So I would like all of it.
I want as much control over
my environment as possible,
especially-
- So you want like
advanced mode?
Like there's menus usually,
there's basic mode.
And you're like one of those folks like-
- I go the-
- Power user advanced.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Got it.
- That's what I want.
I want as much control
over this as possible.
So yeah, that's really all I can ask for.
Just give me everything.
- Has speech been useful?
Like just being able to talk also
in addition to everything else?
- Yeah, you mean like while I'm using it?
- While you're using
it, like speech to text?
- Oh yeah.
- Or do you type,
or like, 'cause there's also a keyboard?
That's really nice.
- Yeah, yeah.
So there's a virtual keyboard.
That's another thing I
would like to work more on
is finding some way to type
or text in a different way.
Right now, it is like
a dictation basically
and a virtual keyboard that
I can use with the cursor.
But we've played around
with like finger spelling,
like sign language, finger spelling.
And that seems really promising.
So I have this thought in my head
that it's going to be a
very similar learning curve
that I had with the cursor,
where I went from attempted movement
to imagined movement at one point.
I have a feeling, this
is just my intuition,
that at some point, I'm going
to be doing finger spelling
and I won't need to actually attempt
to finger spell anymore,
that I'll just be able to think
the like letter that I
want and it'll pop up.
- That would be epic.
- Yeah.
- That's challenging, that's hard.
That's a lot of work for
you to kinda take that leap.
But that would be awesome.
- And then like going from
letters to words is another step.
Like you would go from,
right now, it's finger spelling
of like just the sign language alphabet.
But if it's able to pick that up,
then it should be able to pick up
like the whole sign
language like language.
And so then if I could do
something along those lines,
or just the sign language spelled word,
if I can spell it at a reasonable speed
and it can pick that up,
then I would just be able
to think that through
and it would do the same thing.
I don't see why not.
After what I saw with the cursor control,
I don't see why it wouldn't work,
but we'd have to play around with it more.
- What was the process in
terms of like training yourself
to go from attempted movement
to imagined movement?
How long did that take?
So how long would this
kind of process take?
- Well, it was a couple weeks
before it just like happened upon me.
But now that I know
that that was possible,
I think I could make it
happen with other things.
I think it would be much, much simpler.
- Would you get an
upgraded implant device?
- Sure, absolutely.
Whenever they'll let me.
- So you don't have any concerns
for you with the surgery experience?
All of it was like no regrets?
- No.
- So everything's been good so far?
- Yep.
- You just keep getting upgrades.
- Yeah, I mean, why not?
I've seen how much it's
impacted my life already.
And I know that everything
from here on out,
shit's gonna get better and better.
So I would love to.
I would love to get the upgrade.
- What future capabilities
are you excited about
sort of beyond this kind of telepathy?
Is vision interesting?
So for folks who, for
example, who are blind,
so you're like enabling
people to see, or for speech.
- Yeah, there's a lot that's
very, very cool about this.
I mean, we're talking about the brain,
so like this is just motor cortex stuff.
There's so much more that can be done.
The vision one is fascinating to me.
I think that is going
to be very, very cool.
To give someone the ability to see
for the first time in their
life would just be, I mean it,
it might be more amazing than
even helping someone like me.
Like that just sounds incredible.
The speech thing is really interesting,
being able to have some sort
of like real time translation
and cut away that language
barrier would be really cool.
Any sort of like actual
impairments that it could solve,
like with speech, would
be very, very cool.
And then also, there are a
lot of different disabilities
that all originate in the brain.
And you would be able to,
hopefully be able to solve a lot of those.
I know there's already stuff
to help people with seizures
that can be implanted in the brain.
This would do, I imagine, the same thing.
And so you could do something like that.
I know that even someone like
Joe Rogan has talked about
the possibilities with being able to
stimulate the brain in different ways.
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure how ethical
a lot of that would be.
That's beyond me honestly.
But I know that there's
a lot that can be done
when we're talking about the brain
and being able to go in and physically
make changes to help people
or to improve their lives.
So I'm really looking forward
to everything that comes from this.
And I don't think it's all that far off.
I think a lot of this can be
implemented within my lifetime,
assuming that I live a long life.
- What you were referring
to is things like
people suffering from depression
or things of that nature
potentially getting help.
- Yeah, flip a switch like
that, make someone happy.
I know, I think Joe has
talked about it more
in terms of like you want to experience
like what a drug trip feels like.
Like you wanna experience
what it'd be like to be on-
- Of course.
- Yeah, mushrooms
or something like that, DMT.
Like you can just flip
that switch in the brain.
My buddy Bain has talked about
being able to like wipe parts
of your memory and
re-experience things that,
like for the first time,
like your favorite movie
or your favorite book.
Like just wipe that out real quick,
and then re-fall in love with
Harry Potter or something.
I told him, I was like,
"I don't know how I feel about
like people being able to just
wipe parts of your memory.
That seems a little sketchy to me."
He's like, "They're already doing it."
- Sounds legit.
Yeah, I would love memory replay.
Just like actually high
resolution replay of old memories.
- Yeah, I saw an episode of
"Black Mirror" about that once.
I don't think I want it.
- Yeah, so "Black Mirror"
always kind of considers
the worst case, which is important.
I think people don't
consider the best case
or the average case enough.
I don't know what it is about us humans.
We wanna think about the
worst possible thing.
We love drama.
- [Noland] Yeah. (laughs)
- It's like, how's this new
technology gonna kill everybody?
We just love that.
Again like, yes, let's watch.
- Hopefully, people don't think
about that too much with me.
It'll ruin a lot of my plans.
- Yeah, yeah.
I assume you're gonna have
to take over the world.
I mean, I loved your Twitter.
You tweeted, "I'd like to make jokes
about hearing voices in my head
since getting the Neuralink,
but I feel like people
would take it the wrong way.
Plus, the voices in my
head told me not to."
- Yeah.
- Yeah.
- Yeah.
- Please never stop.
So you're talking about Optimus.
Is that something you would
love to be able to do,
to control the robotic arm
or the entirety of Optimus?
- Oh yeah, for sure.
For sure, absolutely.
- You think there's something
like fundamentally different
about just being able to
physically interact with the world?
- Yeah, oh, 100%.
I know another thing with like being able
to like give people the
ability to like feel sensation
and stuff too by going in with the brain
and having the Neuralink maybe do that.
That could be something that
could be translated through,
transferred through the Optimus as well.
Like there's all sorts of really cool
interplay between that.
And then also, like you said,
just physically interacting.
I mean, 99% of the things
that I can't do myself obviously need,
I need a caretaker for,
someone to physically do things for me.
If an Optimus robot could
do that, like I could live
an incredibly independent life
and not be such a burden
on those around me
and it would change the
way people like me live,
at least until whatever
this is gets cured.
But being able to interact
with the world physically,
like that would just be amazing.
And they're not just like for being,
for having to be a caretaker or something,
but something like I talked about,
just being able to read a book.
Imagine an Optimus robot
just being able to hold a
book open in front of me,
like get that smell again.
I might not be able to
feel it at that point.
Or maybe I could again with
the sensation and stuff.
But there's something
different about reading
like a physical book
than staring at a screen
or listening to an audio book.
I actually don't like audio books.
I've listened to a ton
of them at this point,
but I don't really like 'em.
I would much rather like
read a physical copy.
- So one of the things you would love
to be able to experience
is opening the book,
bringing it up to you.
And to feel the touch of the paper.
- Yeah.
Oh man, the touch, the smell.
I mean, it's just like something
about the words on the page,
and they've replicated that page color
on like the Kindle and stuff.
Yeah, it's just not the same, yeah.
So just something as simple as that.
- So one of the things you miss is touch.
- I do, yeah.
- A lot of things that I
interact with in the world,
like clothes or literally
any physical thing
that I interact with in
the world, a lot of times,
what people around me will
do is they'll just come like,
rub it on my face.
They'll like lay something on
me so I can feel the weight.
They will rub a shirt on
me so I can feel fabric.
Like there's something
very profound about touch,
and it's something that I miss a lot,
and something I would love
to do again, but we'll see.
- What would be the first thing you do
with a hand that can touch?
Give your mom a hug after that, right?
- Yeah, I know.
It's one thing that I've asked like God
for basically every day since my accident
was just being able to like one day move,
even if it was only like my hand.
So that way, like I could
squeeze my mom's hand
or something just to like show her that,
like how much I care and how
much I love her and everything.
Something along those lines.
Being able to just interact
with the people around me,
handshake, give someone a hug.
I don't know, anything like that.
Being able to help me eat, like
I'd probably get really fat,
which would be a terrible, terrible thing.
- Also beat Bliss in chess
on a physical chess board.
- Yeah, yeah.
I mean, there are just
so many upsides. (laughs)
And any way to find some way to feel
like I'm bringing Bliss down to my level.
- Yeah.
- Because-
- Yeah.
- He's just such
an amazing guy, and everything about him
is just so above and beyond
that anything I can do
to take him down a notch,
I'm more than happy.
- Yeah, humble him a bit, he needs it.
- [Noland] Yeah. (laughs)
- Okay.
As he's sitting next to me.
Did you ever make sense of why God
puts good people through such hardship?
- Oh, man.
I think it's all about understanding
how much we need God.
And I don't think that there's
any light without the dark.
I think that if all of us
were happy all the time,
there would be no reason
to turn to God ever.
I feel like there would be
no concept of good or bad.
And I think that as much
of like the darkness
and the evil that's in the
world, it makes us all appreciate
the good and the things
we have so much more.
And I think, like when I had my accident,
one of the first things I said to one
of my best friends was,
and this was within like
the first month or two
after my accident, I said,
"Everything about this
accident has just made me
understand and believe
that like God is real
and that there really is a God, basically.
And that like my interactions with him
have all been real and worthwhile."
And he said, if anything,
seeing me go through this accident,
he believes that there isn't a God.
And it's a very different reaction.
But I believe that it is
a way for God to test us,
to build our character, to send us through
trials and tribulations,
to make sure that we
understand how precious he is,
and the things that he's given us
and the time that he's given us.
And then to hopefully
grow from all of that.
I think that's a huge part of being here
is to not just have an easy life
and do everything that's easy,
but to step out of our comfort zones
and really challenge ourselves,
because I think that's how we grow.
- What gives you hope
about this whole thing
we have going on, human civilization?
- Oh, man.
I think people are my biggest inspiration.
Even just being at
Neuralink for a few months,
looking people in the eyes
and hearing their motivations
for why they're doing
this, it's so inspiring.
And I know that they
could be other places,
cushier jobs, working somewhere else,
doing X, Y, or Z that doesn't
really mean that much.
But instead they're here, and
they want to better humanity
and they want a better,
just the people around them,
the people that they've
interacted with in their life,
they wanna make better lives
for their own family members
who might have disabilities,
or they look at someone like me
and they say, "I can
do something about that
so I'm going to."
And it's always been what I've connected
with most in the world are people.
I've always been a people person
and I love learning about people,
and I love learning like
how people developed
and where they came from.
And to see like how much
people are willing to do
for someone like me
when they don't have to,
and they're going out of their
way to make my life better.
It gives me a lot of hope
for just humanity in general,
how much we care and how
much we're capable of
when we all kind of get together
and try to make a difference.
And I know there's a lot of
bad out there in the world,
but there always has been
and there always will be.
And I think that that is,
it shows human resiliency and it shows
what we're able to endure,
and how much we just want to
be there and help each other,
and how much satisfaction
we get from that,
because I think that's one of the reasons
that we're here is just
to help each other.
And I don't know, that
always gives me hope.
It's just realizing that
there are people out there
who still care and who wanna help.
- And thank you for being
one such human being
and continuing to be a great human being
through everything you've been through
and being an inspiration to many people,
to myself, for many reasons,
including your epic,
unbelievably great performance on Webgrid.
I'll be training all night
tonight to try to catch up.
- You can do it.
- And I believe in you,
that you can once you come back,
so sorry to interrupt
with the Austin trip,
once you come back, eventually beat Bliss.
- Yeah, yeah, for sure.
Absolutely.
- I'm rooting for you.
The whole world is rooting for you.
- Thank you.
- Thank you
for everything you've done, man.
- Thanks, thanks man.
- Thanks for listening
to this conversation
with Nolan Arbaugh, and
before that, with Elon Musk,
DJ Seo, Matthew MacDougall,
and Bliss Chapman.
To support this podcast, please check out
our sponsors in the description.
And now, let me leave you with
some words from Aldous Huxley
in "The Doors of Perception."
"We live together.
We act on and react to one another,
but always, and in all
circumstances, we are by ourselves.
The martyrs go hand in
hand into the arena.
They are crucified alone.
Embraced, the lovers
desperately try to fuse
their insulated ecstasies
into a single self-transcendence; in vain.
By its very nature, every embodied spirit
is doomed to suffer and enjoy in solitude.
Sensations, feelings, insights, fancies,
all these are private and,
except through symbols
and at second hand, incommunicable.
We can pool information about experiences,
but never the experiences themselves.
From family to nation, every human group
is a society of island universes.
Thank you for listening,
and hope to see you next time.